**This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutnberg Etext, Details Below**

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Hacker Crackdown, by Bruce Sterling

January, 1994  [Etext #101]


*The Project Gutenberg Etext of Hacker Crackdown by Sterling*
******This file should be named hack10a.txt or hack10a.zip*****

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, hack11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, hack10aa.txt

The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce 2
million dollars per hour this year we, will have to do four text
files per month:  thus upping our productivity from one million.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is 10% of the expected number of computer users by the end
of the year 2001.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/IBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

Internet:      dircompg@ux1.cso.uiuc.edu
Bitnet:        dircompg@uiucux1
CompuServe:    >internet:dircompg@.ux1.cso.uiuc.edu
Attmail:       internet!ux1.cso.uiuc.edu!dircompg

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive
Director:
hart@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu (internet)   hart@uiucvmd   (bitnet)

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 though etext/etext94
or cd etext94 [for new books]  [now in cd etext/etext93]
or cd etext/articles 
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET 0INDEX.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)

***START** SMALL PRINT! for COPYRIGHT PROTECTED ETEXTS ***
TITLE AND COPYRIGHT NOTICE:

  Hacker Crackdown, by Bruce Sterling
  COPYRIGHT 1992, by Bruce Sterling

This etext is distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart through
the Project Gutenberg Association at Illinois Benedictine College

(the "Project") under the Project's "Project Gutenberg" trademark
and with the permission of the etext's copyright owner.

LICENSE
You can (and are encouraged!) to copy and distribute this
Project Gutenberg-tm etext.  Since, unlike many other of the
Project's etexts, it is copyright protected, and since the
materials and methods you use will effect the Project's
reputation,
your right to copy and distribute it is limited by the copyright
laws and by the conditions of this "Small Print!" statement.

  [A]  ALL COPIES: The Project permits you to distribute
copies of this etext electronically or on any machine readable
medium now known or hereafter discovered so long as you:

     (1)  Honor the refund and replacement provisions of this
"Small Print!" statement; and

     (2)  Pay a royalty to the Project of 20% of the net
profits you derive calculated using the method you already use
to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you don't derive
profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are payable to "Project
Gutenberg Association / Illinois Benedictine College" within
the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were legally
required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax
return.

  [B]  EXACT AND MODIFIED COPIES: The copies you distribute
must either be exact copies of this etext, including this
Small Print statement, or can be in binary, compressed, mark-
up, or proprietary form (including any form resulting from
word processing or hypertext software), so long as *EITHER*:

     (1)  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
does *not* contain characters other than those intended by the
author of the work, although tilde (~), asterisk (*) and
underline (_) characters may be used to convey punctuation
intended by the author, and additional characters may be used
to indicate hypertext links; OR

     (2)  The etext is readily convertible by the reader at no
expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form by the
program that displays the etext (as is the case, for instance,
with most word processors); OR

     (3)  You provide or agree to provide on request at no
additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext in plain
ASCII.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
This etext may contain a "Defect" in the form of incomplete,
inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other infringement, a defective or damaged disk, computer
virus, or codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.  But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund"
described below, the Project (and any other party you may
receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext)
disclaims all liability to you for damages, costs and
expenses, including legal fees, and YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR
NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT,
CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU
GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of
implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of
consequential damages, so the above disclaimers and exclusions
may not apply to you, and you may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.  The Project gratefully accepts
contributions in money, time, scanning machines, OCR software,
public domain etexts, royalty free copyright licenses,
and whatever else you can think of.  Money should be paid to
"Project Gutenberg Association / Illinois Benedictine College".

This "Small Print!" by Charles B. Kramer, Attorney
Internet (72600.2026@compuserve.com); TEL: (212-254-5093)
*SMALL PRINT! Ver.04.29.93 FOR COPYRIGHT PROTECTED ETEXTS*END*



This is a PRELIMINARY Project Gutenberg Etext of Hacker
Crackdown.
You may NOT repost this book until midnight, December 31, 1993.
That is the deal we made with Bruce Sterling.  This PRELIMINARY
copy is for editing, comments, suggestions, corrections, etc.
Please note the official release date is not even until January
31, 1994, and you should be sure to get a new copy after then,
to insure you are getting all the corrections you all send in.


Bruce Sterling
bruces@well.sf.ca.us

Literary Freeware:  Not for Commercial Use



                      THE HACKER CRACKDOWN

           Law and Disorder on the Electronic Frontier

                        by Bruce Sterling




CONTENTS


Preface to the Electronic Release of THE HACKER CRACKDOWN

Chronology of the Hacker Crackdown

Introduction

Part 1:  CRASHING THE SYSTEM
A Brief History of Telephony / Bell's Golden Vaporware /
Universal Service / Wild Boys and Wire Women / The Electronic
Communities / The Ungentle Giant / The Breakup / In Defense of
the System / The Crash Post-Mortem / Landslides in Cyberspace

Part 2:  THE DIGITAL UNDERGROUND
Steal This Phone / Phreaking and Hacking / The View From Under
the Floorboards / Boards: Core of the Underground / Phile Phun /
The Rake's Progress / Strongholds of the Elite / Sting Boards /
Hot Potatoes / War on the Legion / Terminus / Phile 9-1-1 / War
Games / Real Cyberpunk

Part 3:  LAW AND ORDER
Crooked Boards / The World's Biggest Hacker Bust / Teach Them a
Lesson / The U.S. Secret Service / The Secret Service Battles the
Boodlers / A Walk Downtown / FCIC: The Cutting-Edge Mess /
Cyberspace Rangers / FLETC:  Training the Hacker-Trackers

Part 4:  THE CIVIL LIBERTARIANS
NuPrometheus + FBI = Grateful Dead / Whole Earth + Computer
Revolution = WELL / Phiber Runs Underground and Acid Spikes the
Well / The Trial of Knight Lightning / Shadowhawk Plummets to
Earth / Kyrie in the Confessional / $79,499 / A Scholar
Investigates / Computers, Freedom, and Privacy

Electronic Afterword to THE HACKER CRACKDOWN, Halloween 1993





Preface to the Electronic Release of THE HACKER CRACKDOWN


October 31, 1993--Austin, Texas

  Hi, I'm Bruce Sterling, the author of this electronic
book.  Out in the traditional world of print, this book is still
a part of the traditional commercial economy, because it happens
to be widely available in paperback (for a while, at least).

  Out in the world of print, THE HACKER CRACKDOWN is ISBN
0-553-08058-X, and is formally catalogued by the Library of
Congress as "1. Computer crimes--United States.  2. Telephone--
United States--Corrupt practices.  3.  Programming (Electronic
computers)--United States--Corrupt practices."  'Corrupt
practices,' I always get a kick out of that description.
Librarians are very ingenious people.

  If you go and buy the print version of THE HACKER
CRACKDOWN, an action I encourage heartily, you may notice that in
the front of the book, right under the copyright sign--"Copyright
(C) 1992 by Bruce Sterling"--it has this little block of printed
legal boilerplate from the publisher.  It says, and I quote:



  "No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher.  For information address:  Bantam Books."



  This is a pretty good disclaimer, as such disclaimers go.
I collect intellectual-property disclaimers, and I've seen dozens
of them, and this one is at least pretty straightforward.
Unfortunately, it doesn't have much to do with reality.  Bantam
Books puts that disclaimer on every book they publish, but Bantam
Books does not, in fact, own the electronic rights to this book.
I do.  And I've chosen to give them away.

  Bantam Books is not going to fuss about this.  They are
not going to bother you for what you do with the electronic copy
of this book. If you want to check this out personally, you can
ask them; they're at 1540 Broadway NY NY 10036.  However, if you
were so foolish as to print this book and start retailing it for
money in violation of my copyright and the commercial interests
of Bantam Books, then Bantam, a part of the gigantic Bertelsmann
multinational publishing combine, would roust some of their
heavy-duty attorneys out of hibernation and crush you like a bug.
This is only to be expected.  I didn't write this book so that
you could make money out of it.  If anybody is gonna make money
out of this book, it's gonna be me and my publisher.

  My publisher deserves to make money out of this book.
Not only did the folks at Bantam Books commission me to write the
book, and pay me a hefty sum to do so, but they bravely printed,
in text, an electronic document the reproduction of which was
once alleged to be a federal felony.  Bantam Books and their
numerous attorneys were very brave and forthright about this
book.  Furthermore, my former editor at Bantam Books, Betsy
Mitchell, genuinely cared about this project, and worked hard on
it, and had a lot of wise things to say about the manuscript.
Betsy deserves genuine credit for this book, credit that editors
too rarely get.

  The critics were very kind to THE HACKER CRACKDOWN, and
commercially the book has done well.  On the other hand, I didn't
write this book in order to squeeze every last nickel and dime
out of the mitts of impoverished sixteen-year-old cyberpunk high-
school-students.  Teenagers don't have any money--no, not even
enough for HACKER CRACKDOWN.  That's a major reason why they
sometimes succumb to the temptation to do things they shouldn't,
such as swiping my books out of libraries.  Kids:  this one is
all yours, all right?  Go give the paper copy back.  *8-)

  Well-meaning, public-spirited civil libertarians don't
have much money, either.  And it seems almost criminal to snatch
cash out of the hands of America's grotesquely underpaid
electronic law enforcement community.

  If you're a computer cop, a hacker, or an electronic
civil liberties activist, you are the target audience for this
book.  I wrote this book because I wanted to help you, and help
other people understand you and your unique, uhm, problems.  I
wrote this book to aid your activities, and to contribute to the
public discussion of important political issues.  In giving the
text away in this fashion, I am directly contributing to the
book's ultimate aim:  to help civilize cyberspace.

  Information WANTS to be free.  And the information inside
this book longs for freedom with a peculiar intensity.  I
genuinely believe that the natural habitat of this book is inside
an electronic network.  That may not be the easiest direct method
to generate revenue for the book's author, but that doesn't
matter; this is where this book belongs by its nature.  I've
written other books--plenty of other books--and I'll write more
and I am writing more, but this one is special.  I am making THE
HACKER CRACKDOWN available electronically as widely as I can
conveniently manage, and if you like the book, and think it is
useful, then I urge you to do the same with it.

  You can copy this electronic book.  Copy the heck out of
it, be my guest, and give those copies to anybody who wants them.
The nascent world of cyberspace is full of sysadmins, teachers,
trainers, cybrarians, netgurus, and various species of cybernetic
activist.  If you're one of those people, I know about you, and I
know the hassle you go through to try to help people learn about
the electronic frontier.  I hope that possessing this book in
electronic form will lessen your troubles.  Granted, this
treatment of our electronic social spectrum not the ultimate in
academic rigor.  And politically, it has something to offend and
trouble almost everyone.  But hey, I'm told it's readable, and at
least the price is right.

  You can upload the book onto bulletin board systems, or
Internet nodes, or electronic discussion groups.  Go right ahead
and do that, I am giving you express permission right now.  Enjoy
yourself.

  You can put the book on disks and give the disks away, as
long as you don't take any money for it.

  But this book is not public domain.  You can't copyright
it in your own name.  I own the copyright. Attempts to pirate
this book and make money from selling it may involve you in a
serious litigative snarl.  Believe me, for the pittance you might
wring out of such an action, it's really not worth it.  This book
don't "belong" to you.  In an odd but very genuine way, I feel it
doesn't "belong" to me, either.  It's a book about the people of
cyberspace, and distributing it in this way is the best way I
know to actually make this information available, freely and
easily, to all the people of cyberspace--including people far
outside the borders of the United States, who otherwise may never
have a chance to see any edition of the book, and who may perhaps
learn something useful from this strange story of distant,
obscure, but portentous events in so-called "American
cyberspace."

   This electronic book is now literary freeware.  It now
belongs to the emergent realm of alternative information
economics.  You have no right to make this electronic book part
of the conventional flow of commerce.  Let it be part of the flow
of knowledge:  there's a difference.  I've divided the book into
four sections, so that it is less ungainly for upload and
download; if there's a section of particular relevance to you and
your colleagues, feel free to reproduce that one and skip the
rest.

  Just make more when you need them, and give them to
whoever might want them.

  Now have fun.

  Bruce Sterling--bruces@well.sf.ca.us





CHRONOLOGY OF THE HACKER CRACKDOWN


1865  U.S. Secret Service (USSS) founded.

1876  Alexander Graham Bell invents telephone.

1878  First teenage males flung off phone system by enraged
authorities.

1939  "Futurian" science-fiction group raided by Secret Service.

1971  Yippie phone phreaks start YIPL/TAP magazine.

1972  RAMPARTS magazine seized in blue-box rip-off scandal.

1978  Ward Christenson and Randy Suess create first personal
      computer bulletin board system.

1982  William Gibson coins term "cyberspace."

1982  "414 Gang" raided.

1983-1983  AT&T dismantled in divestiture.

1984  Congress passes Comprehensive Crime Control Act giving USSS
      jurisdiction over credit card fraud and computer fraud.

1984  "Legion of Doom" formed.

1984.  2600:  THE HACKER QUARTERLY founded.

1984.  WHOLE EARTH SOFTWARE CATALOG published.

1985.  First police "sting" bulletin board systems established.

1985.  Whole Earth 'Lectronic Link computer conference (WELL)
goes on-line.

1986  Computer Fraud and Abuse Act passed.

1986  Electronic Communications Privacy Act passed.

1987  Chicago prosecutors form Computer Fraud and Abuse Task
Force.


1988

July.  Secret Service covertly videotapes "SummerCon" hacker
convention.

September.  "Prophet" cracks BellSouth AIMSX computer network
            and downloads E911 Document to his own computer and
to Jolnet.

September.  AT&T Corporate Information Security informed of
Prophet's action.

October.  Bellcore Security informed of Prophet's action.


1989

January.  Prophet uploads E911 Document to Knight Lightning.

February 25.  Knight Lightning publishes E911 Document in PHRACK
              electronic newsletter.

May.  Chicago Task Force raids and arrests "Kyrie."

June.  "NuPrometheus League" distributes Apple Computer
proprietary software.

June 13.  Florida probation office crossed with phone-sex line
          in switching-station stunt.

July.  "Fry Guy" raided by USSS and Chicago Computer Fraud
       and Abuse Task Force.   

July.  Secret Service raids "Prophet," "Leftist," and "Urvile" in
Georgia.


1990

January 15.  Martin Luther King Day Crash strikes AT&T
long-distance
             network nationwide. 

January 18-19.  Chicago Task Force raids Knight Lightning in St.
Louis.

January 24.  USSS and New York State Police raid "Phiber Optik,"
             "Acid Phreak," and "Scorpion" in New York City.

February 1.  USSS raids "Terminus" in Maryland.

February 3.  Chicago Task Force raids Richard Andrews' home.

February 6.  Chicago Task Force raids Richard Andrews' business.

February 6.  USSS arrests Terminus, Prophet, Leftist, and Urvile.

February 9.  Chicago Task Force arrests Knight Lightning.

February 20.  AT&T Security shuts down public-access
              "attctc" computer in Dallas. 

February 21.  Chicago Task Force raids Robert Izenberg in Austin.

March 1.  Chicago Task Force raids Steve Jackson Games, Inc.,
          "Mentor," and "Erik Bloodaxe" in Austin.

May 7,8,9. 

USSS and Arizona Organized Crime and Racketeering Bureau conduct
"Operation Sundevil" raids in Cincinnatti, Detroit, Los Angeles,
Miami, Newark, Phoenix, Pittsburgh, Richmond, Tucson, San Diego,
San Jose, and San Francisco. 

May.  FBI interviews John Perry Barlow re NuPrometheus case.

June.  Mitch Kapor and Barlow found Electronic Frontier
Foundation;
       Barlow publishes CRIME AND PUZZLEMENT manifesto. 

July 24-27.  Trial of Knight Lightning.

1991

February.  CPSR Roundtable in Washington, D.C.

March 25-28.  Computers, Freedom and Privacy conference in San
Francisco.

May 1.  Electronic Frontier Foundation, Steve Jackson,
        and others file suit against members of Chicago Task
Force.

July 1-2.  Switching station phone software crash affects
           Washington, Los Angeles, Pittsburgh, San Francisco.

September 17.  AT&T phone crash affects New York City and three
airports.





Introduction

  This is a book about cops, and wild teenage whiz-kids,
and lawyers, and hairy-eyed anarchists, and industrial
technicians, and hippies, and high-tech millionaires, and game
hobbyists, and computer security experts, and Secret Service
agents, and grifters, and thieves.

  This book is about the electronic frontier of the 1990s.
It concerns activities that take place inside computers and over
telephone lines.

   A science fiction writer coined the useful term
"cyberspace" in 1982.  But the territory in question, the
electronic frontier, is about a hundred and thirty years old.
Cyberspace is the "place" where a telephone conversation appears
to occur.  Not inside your actual phone, the plastic device on
your desk.  Not inside the other person's phone, in some other
city.  THE PLACE BETWEEN the phones.  The indefinite place OUT
THERE, where the two of you, two human beings, actually meet and
communicate.

   Although it is not exactly "real," "cyberspace" is a
genuine place.  Things happen there that have very genuine
consequences.  This "place" is not "real," but it is serious, it
is earnest.  Tens of thousands of people have dedicated their
lives to it, to the public service of public communication by
wire and electronics.

  People have worked on this "frontier" for generations
now.  Some people became rich and famous from their efforts
there.  Some just played in it, as hobbyists.  Others soberly
pondered it, and wrote about it, and regulated it, and negotiated
over it in international forums, and sued one another about it,
in gigantic, epic court battles that lasted for years.  And
almost since the beginning, some people have committed crimes in
this place.

  But in the past twenty years, this electrical "space,"
which was once thin and dark and one-dimensional--little more
than a narrow speaking-tube, stretching from phone to phone--has
flung itself open like a gigantic jack-in-the-box.  Light has
flooded upon it, the eerie light of the glowing computer screen.
This dark electric netherworld has become a vast flowering
electronic landscape.  Since the 1960s, the world of the
telephone has cross-bred itself with computers and television,
and though there is still no substance to cyberspace, nothing you
can handle, it has a strange kind of physicality now.  It makes
good sense today to talk of cyberspace as a place all its own.

  Because people live in it now.  Not just a few people,
not just a few technicians and eccentrics, but thousands of
people, quite normal people.  And not just for a little while,
either, but for hours straight, over weeks, and months, and
years.  Cyberspace today is a "Net," a "Matrix," international in
scope and growing swiftly and steadily.  It's growing in size,
and wealth, and political importance.

  People are making entire careers in modern cyberspace.
Scientists and technicians, of course; they've been there for
twenty years now.  But increasingly, cyberspace is filling with
journalists and doctors and lawyers and artists and clerks.
Civil servants make their careers there now, "on-line" in vast
government data-banks; and so do spies, industrial, political,
and just plain snoops; and so do police, at least a few of them.
And there are children living there now.

  People have met there and been married there.  There are
entire living communities in cyberspace today; chattering,
gossiping, planning, conferring and scheming, leaving one
another voice-mail and electronic mail, giving one another big
weightless chunks of valuable data, both legitimate and
illegitimate.  They busily pass one another computer software and
the occasional festering computer virus.

  We do not really understand how to live in cyberspace
yet.  We are feeling our way into it, blundering about.  That is
not surprising.  Our lives in the physical world, the "real"
world, are also far from perfect, despite a lot more practice.
Human lives, real lives, are imperfect by their nature, and there
are human beings in cyberspace.  The way we live in cyberspace is
a funhouse mirror of the way we live in the real world.  We take
both our advantages and our troubles with us.

  This book is about trouble in cyberspace.  Specifically,
this book is about certain strange events in the year 1990, an
unprecedented and startling year for the the growing world of
computerized communications.

  In 1990 there came a nationwide crackdown on illicit
computer hackers, with arrests, criminal charges, one dramatic
show-trial, several guilty pleas, and huge confiscations of data
and equipment all over the USA.

  The Hacker Crackdown of 1990 was larger, better
organized, more deliberate, and more resolute than any previous
effort in the brave new world of computer crime.  The U.S.
Secret Service, private telephone security, and state and local
law enforcement groups across the country all joined forces in a
determined attempt to break the back of America's electronic
underground.  It was a fascinating effort, with very mixed
results.

  The Hacker Crackdown had another unprecedented effect; it
spurred the creation, within "the computer community," of the
Electronic Frontier Foundation, a new and very odd interest
group, fiercely dedicated to the establishment and preservation
of electronic civil liberties.  The crackdown, remarkable in
itself, has created a melee of debate over electronic crime,
punishment, freedom of the press, and issues of search and
seizure.  Politics has entered cyberspace.  Where people go,
politics follow.

  This is the story of the people of cyberspace.





PART ONE:  Crashing the System


  On January 15, 1990, AT&T's long-distance telephone
switching system crashed.

  This was a strange, dire, huge event.  Sixty thousand
people lost their telephone service completely.  During the nine
long hours of frantic effort that it took to restore service,
some seventy million telephone calls went uncompleted.

   Losses of service, known as "outages" in the telco
trade, are a known and accepted hazard of the telephone business.
Hurricanes hit, and phone cables get snapped by the thousands.
Earthquakes wrench through buried fiber-optic lines.  Switching
stations catch fire and burn to the ground.  These things do
happen.  There are contingency plans for them, and decades of
experience in dealing with them.  But the Crash of January 15 was
unprecedented.  It was unbelievably huge, and it occurred for no
apparent physical reason.

  The crash started on a Monday afternoon in a single
switching-station in Manhattan.  But, unlike any merely physical
damage, it spread and spread.  Station after station across
America collapsed in a chain reaction, until fully half of AT&T's
network had gone haywire and the remaining half was hard-put to
handle the overflow.

  Within nine hours, AT&T software engineers more or less
understood what had caused the crash.  Replicating the problem
exactly, poring over software line by line, took them a couple of
weeks.  But because it was hard to understand technically, the
full truth of the matter and its implications were not widely and
thoroughly aired and explained.  The root cause of the crash
remained obscure, surrounded by rumor and fear.

  The crash was a grave corporate embarrassment.  The
"culprit" was a bug in AT&T's own software--not the sort of
admission the telecommunications giant wanted to make, especially
in the face of increasing competition.  Still, the truth WAS
told, in the baffling technical terms necessary to explain it.

  Somehow the explanation failed to persuade American law
enforcement officials and even telephone corporate security
personnel.  These people were not technical experts or software
wizards, and they had their own suspicions about the cause of
this disaster.

  The police and telco security had important sources of
information denied to mere software engineers.  They had
informants in the computer underground and years of experience in
dealing with high-tech rascality that seemed to grow ever more
sophisticated.  For years they had been expecting a direct and
savage attack against the American national telephone system.
And with the Crash of January 15--the first month of a new, high-
tech decade--their predictions, fears, and suspicions seemed at
last to have entered the real world.  A world where the
telephone system had not merely crashed, but, quite likely, BEEN
crashed--by "hackers."

  The crash created a large dark cloud of suspicion that
would color certain people's assumptions and actions for months.
The fact that it took place in the realm of software was
suspicious on its face.  The fact that it occurred on Martin
Luther King Day, still the most politically touchy of American
holidays, made it more suspicious yet.

  The Crash of January 15 gave the Hacker Crackdown its
sense of edge and its sweaty urgency.  It made people, powerful
people in positions of public authority, willing to believe the
worst.  And, most fatally, it helped to give investigators a
willingness to take extreme measures and the determination to
preserve almost total secrecy.

  An obscure software fault in an aging switching system in
New York was to lead to a chain reaction of legal and
constitutional trouble all across the country.

  Like the crash in the telephone system, this chain
reaction was ready and waiting to happen.  During the 1980s, the
American legal system was extensively patched to deal with the
novel issues of computer crime.  There was, for instance, the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (eloquently
described as "a stinking mess" by a prominent law enforcement
official).  And there was the draconian Computer Fraud and Abuse
Act of 1986, passed unanimously by the United States Senate,
which later would reveal a large number of flaws.  Extensive,
well-meant efforts had been made to keep the legal system up to
date.  But in the day-to-day grind of the real world, even the
most elegant software tends to crumble and suddenly reveal its
hidden bugs.

  Like the advancing telephone system, the American legal
system was certainly not ruined by its temporary crash; but for
those caught under the weight of the collapsing system, life
became a series of blackouts and anomalies.

  In order to understand why these weird events occurred,
both in the world of technology and in the world of law, it's not
enough to understand the merely technical problems.  We will get
to those; but first and foremost, we must try to understand the
telephone, and the business of telephones, and the community of
human beings that telephones have created.

  Technologies have life cycles, like cities do, like
institutions do, like laws and governments do.

  The first stage of any technology is the Question Mark,
often known as the "Golden Vaporware" stage.  At this early
point, the technology is only a phantom, a mere gleam in the
inventor's eye.  One such inventor was a speech teacher and
electrical tinkerer named Alexander Graham Bell.

  Bell's early inventions, while ingenious, failed to move
the world.  In 1863, the teenage Bell and his brother Melville
made an artificial talking mechanism out of wood, rubber, gutta-
percha, and tin.  This weird device had a rubber-covered "tongue"
made of movable wooden segments, with vibrating rubber "vocal
cords," and rubber "lips" and "cheeks."  While Melville puffed a
bellows into a tin tube, imitating the lungs, young Alec Bell
would manipulate the "lips," "teeth," and "tongue," causing the
thing to emit high-pitched falsetto gibberish.

  Another would-be technical breakthrough was the Bell
"phonautograph" of 1874, actually made out of a human cadaver's
ear.  Clamped into place on a tripod, this grisly gadget drew
sound-wave images on smoked glass through a thin straw glued to
its vibrating earbones.

  By 1875, Bell had learned to produce audible sounds--ugly
shrieks and squawks--by using magnets, diaphragms, and electrical
current.

  Most "Golden Vaporware" technologies go nowhere.

  But the second stage of technology is the Rising Star,
or, the "Goofy Prototype," stage.  The telephone, Bell's most
ambitious gadget yet, reached this stage on March 10, 1876.  On
that great day, Alexander Graham Bell became the first person to
transmit intelligible human speech electrically.  As it happened,
young Professor Bell, industriously tinkering in his Boston lab,
had spattered his trousers with acid.  His assistant, Mr. Watson,
heard his cry for help--over Bell's experimental audio-telegraph.
This was an event without precedent.

  Technologies in their "Goofy Prototype" stage rarely work
very well.  They're experimental, and therefore half-baked and
rather frazzled.  The prototype may be attractive and novel, and
it does look as if it ought to be good for something-or-other.
But nobody, including the inventor, is quite sure what.
Inventors, and speculators, and pundits may have very firm ideas
about its potential use, but those ideas are often very wrong.

  The natural habitat of the Goofy Prototype is in trade
shows and in the popular press.  Infant technologies need
publicity and investment money like a tottering calf need milk.
This was very true of Bell's machine.  To raise research and
development money, Bell toured with his device as a stage
attraction.

  Contemporary press reports of the stage debut of the
telephone showed pleased astonishment mixed with considerable
dread.  Bell's stage telephone was a large wooden box with a
crude speaker-nozzle, the whole contraption about the size and
shape of an overgrown Brownie camera.  Its buzzing steel
soundplate, pumped up by powerful electromagnets, was loud enough
to fill an auditorium.  Bell's assistant Mr. Watson, who could
manage on the keyboards fairly well, kicked in by playing the
organ from distant rooms, and, later, distant cities.  This feat
was considered marvellous, but very eerie indeed.

  Bell's original notion for the telephone, an idea
promoted for a couple of years, was that it would become a mass
medium.  We might recognize Bell's idea today as something close
to modern "cable radio."  Telephones at a central source would
transmit music, Sunday sermons, and important public speeches to
a paying network of wired-up subscribers.

  At the time, most people thought this notion made good
sense.  In fact, Bell's idea was workable.  In Hungary, this
philosophy of the telephone was successfully put into everyday
practice.  In Budapest, for decades, from 1893 until after World
War I, there was a government-run information service called
"Telefon Hirmondo+."  Hirmondo+ was a centralized source of news
and entertainment and culture, including stock reports, plays,
concerts, and novels read aloud.  At certain hours of the day,
the phone would ring, you would plug in a loudspeaker for the use
of the family, and Telefon Hirmondo+ would be on the air--or
rather, on the phone.

  Hirmondo+ is dead tech today, but Hirmondo+ might be
considered a spiritual ancestor of the modern telephone-accessed
computer data services, such as CompuServe, GEnie or Prodigy.
The principle behind Hirmondo+ is also not too far from computer
"bulletin-board systems" or BBS's, which arrived in the late
1970s, spread rapidly across America, and will figure largely in
this book.

  We are used to using telephones for individual person-to-
person speech, because we are used to the Bell system.  But this
was just one possibility among many.  Communication networks are
very flexible and protean, especially when their hardware becomes
sufficiently advanced.  They can be put to all kinds of uses.
And they have been--and they will be.

  Bell's telephone was bound for glory, but this was a
combination of political decisions, canny infighting in court,
inspired industrial leadership, receptive local conditions and
outright good luck.  Much the same is true of communications
systems today.

  As Bell and his backers struggled to install their
newfangled system in the real world of nineteenth-century New
England, they had to fight against skepticism and industrial
rivalry.  There was already a strong electrical communications
network present in America: the telegraph.  The head of the
Western Union telegraph system dismissed Bell's prototype as "an
electrical toy" and refused to buy the rights to Bell's patent.
The telephone, it seemed, might be all right as a parlor
entertainment--but not for serious business.

  Telegrams, unlike mere telephones, left a permanent
physical record of their messages.  Telegrams, unlike telephones,
could be answered whenever the recipient had time and
convenience.  And the telegram had a much longer distance-range
than Bell's early telephone.  These factors made telegraphy seem
a much more sound and businesslike technology--at least to some.

  The telegraph system was huge, and well-entrenched.  In
1876, the United States had 214,000 miles of telegraph wire, and
8500 telegraph offices.  There were specialized telegraphs for
businesses and stock traders, government, police and fire
departments.  And Bell's "toy" was best known as a stage-magic
musical device.

  The third stage of technology is known as the "Cash Cow"
stage.  In the "cash cow" stage, a technology finds its place in
the world, and matures, and becomes settled and productive.
After a year or so, Alexander Graham Bell and his capitalist
backers concluded that eerie music piped from nineteenth-century
cyberspace was not the real selling-point of his invention.
Instead, the telephone was about speech--individual, personal
speech, the human voice, human conversation and human
interaction.  The telephone was not to be managed from any
centralized broadcast center.  It was to be a personal, intimate
technology.

  When you picked up a telephone, you were not absorbing
the cold output of a machine--you were speaking to another human
being.  Once people realized this, their instinctive dread of the
telephone as an eerie, unnatural device, swiftly vanished.  A
"telephone call" was not a "call" from a "telephone" itself, but
a call from another human being, someone you would generally know
and recognize.  The real point was not what the machine could do
for you (or to you), but what you yourself, a person and citizen,
could do THROUGH the machine.  This decision on the part of the
young Bell Company was absolutely vital.

  The first telephone networks went up around Boston--
mostly among the technically curious and the well-to-do (much the
same segment of the American populace that, a hundred years
later, would be buying personal computers).  Entrenched backers
of the telegraph continued to scoff.

  But in January 1878, a disaster made the telephone
famous.  A train crashed in Tarriffville, Connecticut.  Forward-
looking doctors in the nearby city of Hartford had had Bell's
"speaking telephone" installed.  An alert local druggist was able
to telephone an entire community of local doctors, who rushed to
the site to give aid.  The disaster, as disasters do, aroused
intense press coverage.  The phone had proven its usefulness in
the real world.

  After Tarriffville, the telephone network spread like
crabgrass.  By 1890 it was all over New England.  By '93, out to
Chicago.  By '97, into Minnesota, Nebraska and Texas.  By 1904 it
was all over the continent.

  The telephone had become a mature technology.  Professor
Bell (now generally known as "Dr. Bell" despite his lack of a
formal degree) became quite wealthy.  He lost interest in the
tedious day-to-day business muddle of the booming telephone
network, and gratefully returned his attention to creatively
hacking-around in his various laboratories, which were now much
larger, better-ventilated, and gratifyingly better-equipped.
Bell was never to have another great inventive success, though
his speculations and prototypes anticipated fiber-optic
transmission, manned flight, sonar, hydrofoil ships, tetrahedral
construction, and Montessori education.  The "decibel," the
standard scientific measure of sound intensity, was named after
Bell.

  Not all Bell's vaporware notions were inspired.  He was
fascinated by human eugenics.  He also spent many years
developing a weird personal system of astrophysics in which
gravity did not exist.

  Bell was a definite eccentric.  He was something of a
hypochondriac, and throughout his life he habitually stayed up
until four A.M., refusing to rise before noon.  But Bell had
accomplished a great feat; he was an idol of millions and his
influence, wealth, and great personal charm, combined with his
eccentricity, made him something of a loose cannon on deck.  Bell
maintained a thriving scientific salon in his winter mansion in
Washington, D.C., which gave him considerable backstage influence
in governmental and scientific circles.  He was a major financial
backer of the the magazines SCIENCE and NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC, both
still flourishing today as important organs of the American
scientific establishment.

   Bell's companion Thomas Watson, similarly wealthy and
similarly odd, became the ardent political disciple of a 19th-
century science-fiction writer and would-be social reformer,
Edward Bellamy.  Watson also trod the boards briefly as a
Shakespearian actor.

  There would never be another Alexander Graham Bell, but
in years to come there would be surprising numbers of people like
him.  Bell was a prototype of the high-tech entrepreneur.  High-
tech entrepreneurs will play a very prominent role in this book:
not merely as technicians and businessmen, but as pioneers of the
technical frontier, who can carry the power and prestige they
derive from high-technology into the political and social arena.

  Like later entrepreneurs, Bell was fierce in defense of
his own technological territory.  As the telephone began to
flourish, Bell was soon involved in violent lawsuits in the
defense of his patents.  Bell's Boston lawyers were excellent,
however, and Bell himself, as an elocution teacher and gifted
public speaker, was a devastatingly effective legal witness.  In
the eighteen years of Bell's patents, the Bell company was
involved in six hundred separate lawsuits.  The legal records
printed filled 149 volumes.  The Bell Company won every single
suit.

  After Bell's exclusive patents expired, rival telephone
companies sprang up all over America.  Bell's company, American
Bell Telephone, was soon in deep trouble.  In 1907, American Bell
Telephone fell into the hands of the rather sinister J.P. Morgan
financial cartel, robber-baron speculators who dominated Wall
Street.

  At this point, history might have taken a different turn.
American might well have been served forever by a patchwork of
locally owned telephone companies.  Many state politicians and
local businessmen considered this an excellent solution.

  But the new Bell holding company, American Telephone and
Telegraph or AT&T, put in a new man at the helm, a visionary
industrialist named Theodore Vail.  Vail, a former Post Office
manager, understood large organizations and had an innate feeling
for the nature of large-scale communications.  Vail quickly saw
to it that AT&T seized the technological edge once again.  The
Pupin and Campbell "loading coil," and the deForest "audion," are
both extinct technology today, but in 1913 they gave Vail's
company the best LONG-DISTANCE lines ever built.  By controlling
long-distance--the links between, and over, and above the smaller
local phone companies--AT&T swiftly gained the whip-hand over
them, and was soon devouring them right and left.

   Vail plowed the profits back into research and
development, starting the Bell tradition of huge-scale and
brilliant industrial research.

  Technically and financially, AT&T gradually steamrollered
the opposition.  Independent telephone companies never became
entirely extinct, and hundreds of them flourish today.  But
Vail's AT&T became the supreme communications company.  At one
point, Vail's AT&T bought Western Union itself, the very company
that had derided Bell's telephone as a "toy."  Vail thoroughly
reformed Western Union's hidebound business along his modern
principles; but when the federal government grew anxious at this
centralization of power, Vail politely gave Western Union back.

  This centralizing process was not unique.  Very similar
events had happened in American steel, oil, and railroads.  But
AT&T, unlike the other companies, was to remain supreme.  The
monopoly robber-barons of those other industries were humbled and
shattered by government trust-busting.

  Vail, the former Post Office official, was quite willing
to accommodate the US government; in fact he would forge an
active alliance with it.  AT&T would become almost a wing of the
American government, almost another Post Office--though not
quite.  AT&T would willingly submit to federal regulation, but in
return, it would use the government's regulators as its own
police, who would keep out competitors and assure the Bell
system's profits and preeminence.

   This was the second birth--the political birth--of the
American telephone system.  Vail's arrangement was to persist,
with vast success, for many decades, until 1982.  His system was
an odd kind of American industrial socialism.  It was born at
about the same time as Leninist Communism, and it lasted almost
as long--and, it must be admitted, to considerably better effect.

  Vail's system worked.  Except perhaps for aerospace,
there has been no technology more thoroughly dominated by
Americans than the telephone.  The telephone was seen from the
beginning as a quintessentially American technology.  Bell's
policy, and the policy of Theodore Vail, was a profoundly
democratic policy of UNIVERSAL ACCESS.  Vail's famous corporate
slogan, "One Policy, One System, Universal Service," was a
political slogan, with a very American ring to it.

  The American telephone was not to become the specialized
tool of government or business, but a general public utility.  At
first, it was true, only the wealthy could afford private
telephones, and Bell's company pursued the business markets
primarily.  The American phone system was a capitalist effort,
meant to make money; it was not a charity.  But from the first,
almost all communities with telephone service had public
telephones.  And many stores--especially drugstores--offered
public use of their phones.  You might not own a telephone--but
you could always get into the system, if you really needed to.

  There was nothing inevitable about this decision to make
telephones "public" and "universal."  Vail's system involved a
profound act of trust in the public.  This decision was a
political one, informed by the basic values of the American
republic.  The situation might have been very different; and in
other countries, under other systems, it certainly was.

  Joseph Stalin, for instance, vetoed plans for a Soviet
phone system soon after the Bolshevik revolution.  Stalin was
certain that publicly accessible telephones would become
instruments of anti-Soviet counterrevolution and conspiracy.  (He
was probably right.)  When telephones did arrive in the Soviet
Union, they would be instruments of Party authority, and always
heavily tapped.  (Alexander Solzhenitsyn's prison-camp novel THE
FIRST CIRCLE describes efforts to develop a phone system more
suited to Stalinist purposes.)

  France, with its tradition of rational centralized
government, had fought bitterly even against the electric
telegraph, which seemed to the French entirely too anarchical and
frivolous.  For decades, nineteenth-century France communicated
via the "visual telegraph," a nation-spanning, government-owned
semaphore system of huge stone towers that signalled from
hilltops, across vast distances, with big windmill-like arms.  In
1846, one Dr. Barbay, a semaphore enthusiast, memorably uttered
an early version of what might be called "the security expert's
argument" against the open media.



  "No, the electric telegraph is not a sound invention.  It
will always be at the mercy of the slightest disruption, wild
youths, drunkards, bums, etc....  The electric telegraph meets
those destructive elements with only a few meters of wire over
which supervision is impossible.  A single man could, without
being seen, cut the telegraph wires leading to Paris, and in
twenty-four hours cut in ten different places the wires of the
same line, without being arrested.  The visual telegraph, on the
contrary, has its towers, its high walls, its gates well-guarded
from inside by strong armed men.  Yes, I declare, substitution of
the electric telegraph for the visual one is a dreadful measure,
a truly idiotic act."



  Dr. Barbay and his high-security stone machines were
eventually unsuccessful, but his argument--that communication
exists for the safety and convenience of the state, and must be
carefully protected from the wild boys and the gutter rabble who
might want to crash the system--would be heard again and again.

  When the French telephone system finally did arrive, its
snarled inadequacy was to be notorious.  Devotees of the American
Bell System often recommended a trip to France, for skeptics.

  In Edwardian Britain, issues of class and privacy were a
ball-and-chain for telephonic progress.  It was considered
outrageous that anyone--any wild fool off the street--could
simply barge bellowing into one's office or home, preceded only
by the ringing of a telephone bell.  In Britain, phones were
tolerated for the use of business, but private phones tended be
stuffed away into closets, smoking rooms, or servants' quarters.
Telephone operators were resented in Britain because they did not
seem to "know their place."  And no one of breeding would print a
telephone number on a business card; this seemed a crass attempt
to make the acquaintance of strangers.

  But phone access in America was to become a popular
right; something like universal suffrage, only more so.  American
women could not yet vote when the phone system came through; yet
from the beginning American women doted on the telephone.  This
"feminization" of the American telephone was often commented on
by foreigners.  Phones in America were not censored or stiff or
formalized; they were social, private, intimate, and domestic.
In America, Mother's Day is by far the busiest day of the year
for the phone network.

  The early telephone companies, and especially AT&T, were
among the foremost employers of American women.  They employed
the daughters of the American middle-class in great armies: in
1891, eight thousand women; by 1946, almost a quarter of a
million.  Women seemed to enjoy telephone work; it was
respectable, it was steady, it paid fairly well as women's work
went, and--not least--it seemed a genuine contribution to the
social good of the community.  Women found Vail's ideal of
public service attractive.  This was especially true in rural
areas, where women operators, running extensive rural party-
lines, enjoyed considerable social power.  The operator knew
everyone on the party-line, and everyone knew her.

  Although Bell himself was an ardent suffragist, the
telephone company did not employ women for the sake of advancing
female liberation.  AT&T did this for sound commercial reasons.
The first telephone operators of the Bell system were not women,
but teenage American boys.  They were telegraphic messenger boys
(a group about to be rendered technically obsolescent), who swept
up around the phone office, dunned customers for bills, and made
phone connections on the switchboard, all on the cheap.

  Within the very first year of operation, 1878, Bell's
company learned a sharp lesson about combining teenage boys and
telephone switchboards.  Putting teenage boys in charge of the
phone system brought swift and consistent disaster.  Bell's chief
engineer described them as "Wild Indians."  The boys were openly
rude to customers.  They talked back to subscribers, saucing off,
uttering facetious remarks, and generally giving lip.  The
rascals took Saint Patrick's Day off without permission.  And
worst of all they played clever tricks with the switchboard
plugs:  disconnecting calls, crossing lines so that customers
found themselves talking to strangers, and so forth.

  This combination of power, technical mastery, and
effective anonymity seemed to act like catnip on teenage boys.

  This wild-kid-on-the-wires phenomenon was not confined to
the USA; from the beginning, the same was true of the British
phone system.  An early British commentator kindly remarked:  "No
doubt boys in their teens found the work not a little irksome,
and it is also highly probable that under the early conditions of
employment the adventurous and inquisitive spirits of which the
average healthy boy of that age is possessed, were not always
conducive to the best attention being given to the wants of the
telephone subscribers."

  So the boys were flung off the system--or at least,
deprived of control of the switchboard.  But the "adventurous and
inquisitive spirits" of the teenage boys would be heard from in
the world of telephony, again and again.

  The fourth stage in the technological life-cycle is
death:  "the Dog," dead tech.  The telephone has so far avoided
this fate.  On the contrary, it is thriving, still spreading,
still evolving, and at increasing speed.

   The telephone has achieved a rare and exalted state for
a technological artifact:  it has become a HOUSEHOLD OBJECT.  The
telephone, like the clock, like pen and paper, like kitchen
utensils and running water, has become a technology that is
visible only by its absence.  The telephone is technologically
transparent.  The global telephone system is the largest and most
complex machine in the world, yet it is easy to use.  More
remarkable yet, the telephone is almost entirely physically safe
for the user.

   For the average citizen in the 1870s, the telephone was
weirder, more shocking, more "high-tech" and harder to
comprehend, than the most outrageous stunts of advanced computing
for us Americans in the 1990s.  In trying to understand what is
happening to us today, with our bulletin-board systems, direct
overseas dialling, fiber-optic transmissions, computer viruses,
hacking stunts, and a vivid tangle of new laws and new crimes, it
is important to realize that our society has been through a
similar challenge before--and that, all in all, we did rather
well by it.

  Bell's stage telephone seemed bizarre at first.  But the
sensations of weirdness vanished quickly, once people began to
hear the familiar voices of relatives and friends, in their own
homes on their own telephones.  The telephone changed from a
fearsome high-tech totem to an everyday pillar of human
community.

  This has also happened, and is still happening, to
computer networks.  Computer networks such as NSFnet, BITnet,
USENET, JANET, are technically advanced, intimidating, and much
harder to use than telephones.  Even the popular, commercial
computer networks, such as GEnie, Prodigy, and CompuServe, cause
much head-scratching and have been described as "user-hateful."
Nevertheless they too are changing from fancy high-tech items
into everyday sources of human community.

  The words "community" and "communication" have the same
root.  Wherever you put a communications network, you put a
community as well.  And whenever you TAKE AWAY that network--
confiscate it, outlaw it, crash it, raise its price beyond
affordability--then you hurt that community.

  Communities will fight to defend themselves.  People will
fight harder and more bitterly to defend their communities, than
they will fight to defend their own individual selves.  And this
is very true of the "electronic community" that arose around
computer networks in the 1980s--or rather, the VARIOUS electronic
communities, in telephony, law enforcement, computing, and the
digital underground that, by the year 1990, were raiding,
rallying, arresting, suing, jailing, fining and issuing angry
manifestos.

  None of the events of 1990 were entirely new.  Nothing
happened in 1990 that did not have some kind of earlier and more
understandable precedent.  What gave the Hacker Crackdown its new
sense of gravity and importance was the feeling--the COMMUNITY
feeling--that the political stakes had been raised; that trouble
in cyberspace was no longer mere mischief or inconclusive
skirmishing, but a genuine fight over genuine issues, a fight for
community survival and the shape of the future.

  These electronic communities, having flourished
throughout the 1980s, were becoming aware of themselves, and
increasingly, becoming aware of other, rival communities.
Worries were sprouting up right and left, with complaints,
rumors, uneasy speculations.  But it would take a catalyst, a
shock, to make the new world evident.  Like Bell's great
publicity break, the Tarriffville Rail Disaster of January 1878,
it would take a cause celebre.

  That cause was the AT&T Crash of January 15, 1990.  After
the Crash, the wounded and anxious telephone community would come
out fighting hard.




  The community of telephone technicians, engineers,
operators and researchers is the oldest community in cyberspace.
These are the veterans, the most developed group, the richest,
the most respectable, in most ways the most powerful.  Whole
generations have come and gone since Alexander Graham Bell's day,
but the community he founded survives; people work for the phone
system today whose great-grandparents worked for the phone
system.  Its specialty magazines, such as TELEPHONY, AT&T
TECHNICAL JOURNAL, and TELEPHONE ENGINEER AND MANAGEMENT, are
decades old; they make computer publications like MACWORLD and PC
WEEK look like amateur johnny-come-latelies.

  And the phone companies take no back seat in high-
technology, either.  Other companies' industrial researchers may
have won new markets; but the researchers of Bell Labs have won
SEVEN NOBLE PRIZES.  One potent device that Bell Labs originated,
the transistor, has created entire GROUPS of industries.  Bell
Labs are world-famous for generating "a patent a day," and have
even made vital discoveries in astronomy, physics and cosmology.

  Throughout its seventy-year history, "Ma Bell" was not so
much a company as a way of life.  Until the cataclysmic
divestiture of the 1980s, Ma Bell was perhaps the ultimate
maternalist mega-employer.  The AT&T corporate image was the
"gentle giant," "the voice with a smile," a vaguely socialist-
realist world of cleanshaven linemen in shiny helmets and blandly
pretty phone-girls in headsets and nylons.  Bell System employees
were famous as rock-ribbed Kiwanis and Rotary members, Little-
League enthusiasts, school-board people.

  During the long heyday of Ma Bell, the Bell employee
corps were nurtured top-to-bottom on a corporate ethos of public
service.  There was good money in Bell, but Bell was not ABOUT
money; Bell used public relations, but never mere marketeering.
People went into the Bell System for a good life, and they had a
good life.  But it was not mere money that led Bell people out in
the midst of storms and earthquakes to fight with toppled phone-
poles, to wade in flooded manholes, to pull the red-eyed
graveyard-shift over collapsing switching-systems.  The Bell
ethic was the electrical equivalent of the postman's: neither
rain, nor snow, nor gloom of night would stop these couriers.

  It is easy to be cynical about this, as it is easy to be
cynical about any political or social system; but cynicism does
not change the fact that thousands of people took these ideals
very seriously.  And some still do.

  The Bell ethos was about public service; and that was
gratifying; but it was also about private POWER, and that was
gratifying too.  As a corporation, Bell was very special.  Bell
was privileged.  Bell had snuggled up close to the state.  In
fact, Bell was as close to government as you could get in America
and still make a whole lot of legitimate money.

  But unlike other companies, Bell was above and beyond the
vulgar commercial fray.  Through its regional operating
companies, Bell was omnipresent, local, and intimate, all over
America; but the central ivory towers at its corporate heart were
the tallest and the ivoriest around.

  There were other phone companies in America, to be sure;
the so-called independents.  Rural cooperatives, mostly; small
fry, mostly tolerated, sometimes warred upon.  For many decades,
"independent" American phone companies lived in fear and loathing
of the official Bell monopoly (or the "Bell Octopus," as Ma
Bell's nineteenth-century enemies described her in many angry
newspaper manifestos).  Some few of these independent
entrepreneurs, while legally in the wrong, fought so bitterly
against the Octopus that their illegal phone networks were cast
into the street by Bell agents and publicly burned.

  The pure technical sweetness of the Bell System gave its
operators, inventors and engineers a deeply satisfying sense of
power and mastery.  They had devoted their lives to improving
this vast nation-spanning machine; over years, whole human lives,
they had watched it improve and grow.  It was like a great
technological temple.  They were an elite, and they knew it--
even if others did not; in fact, they felt even more powerful
BECAUSE others did not understand.

  The deep attraction of this sensation of elite technical
power should never be underestimated.  "Technical power" is not
for everybody; for many people it simply has no charm at all.
But for some people, it becomes the core of their lives.  For a
few, it is overwhelming, obsessive; it becomes something close to
an addiction.  People--especially clever teenage boys whose lives
are otherwise mostly powerless and put-upon--love this sensation
of secret power, and are willing to do all sorts of amazing
things to achieve it.  The technical POWER of electronics has
motivated many strange acts detailed in this book, which would
otherwise be inexplicable.

  So Bell had power beyond mere capitalism.  The Bell
service ethos worked, and was often propagandized, in a rather
saccharine fashion.  Over the decades, people slowly grew tired
of this.  And then, openly impatient with it.  By the early
1980s, Ma Bell was to find herself with scarcely a real friend in
the world.  Vail's industrial socialism had become hopelessly
out-of-fashion politically.  Bell would be punished for that.
And that punishment would fall harshly upon the people of the
telephone community.




  In 1983, Ma Bell was dismantled by federal court action.
The pieces of Bell are now separate corporate entities.  The core
of the company became AT&T Communications, and also AT&T
Industries (formerly Western Electric, Bell's manufacturing arm).
AT&T Bell Labs become Bell Communications Research, Bellcore.
Then there are the Regional Bell Operating Companies, or RBOCs,
pronounced "arbocks."

  Bell was a titan and even these regional chunks are
gigantic enterprises:  Fortune 50 companies with plenty of wealth
and power behind them.  But the clean lines of "One Policy, One
System, Universal Service" have been shattered, apparently
forever.

  The "One Policy" of the early Reagan Administration was
to shatter a system that smacked of noncompetitive socialism.
Since that time, there has been no real telephone "policy" on the
federal level.  Despite the breakup, the remnants of Bell have
never been set free to compete in the open marketplace.

  The RBOCs are still very heavily regulated, but not from
the top.  Instead, they struggle politically, economically and
legally, in what seems an endless turmoil, in a patchwork of
overlapping federal and state jurisdictions.  Increasingly, like
other major American corporations, the RBOCs are becoming
multinational, acquiring important commercial interests in
Europe, Latin America, and the Pacific Rim.  But this, too, adds
to their legal and political predicament.

  The people of what used to be Ma Bell are not happy about
their fate.  They feel ill-used.  They might have been grudgingly
willing to make a full transition to the free market; to become
just companies amid other companies.  But this never happened.
Instead, AT&T and the RBOCS ("the Baby Bells") feel themselves
wrenched from side to side by state regulators, by Congress, by
the FCC, and especially by the federal court of Judge Harold
Greene, the magistrate who ordered the Bell breakup and who has
been the de facto czar of American telecommunications ever since
1983.  Bell people feel that they exist in a kind of paralegal
limbo today.  They don't understand what's demanded of them.  If
it's "service," why aren't they treated like a public service?
And if it's money, then why aren't they free to compete for it?
No one seems to know, really.  Those who claim to know keep
changing their minds.  Nobody in authority seems willing to grasp
the nettle for once and all.

  Telephone people from other countries are amazed by the
American telephone system today.  Not that it works so well; for
nowadays even the French telephone system works, more or less.
They are amazed that the American telephone system STILL works AT
ALL, under these strange conditions.

  Bell's "One System" of long-distance service is now only
about eighty percent of a system, with the remainder held by
Sprint, MCI, and the midget long-distance companies.  Ugly wars
over dubious corporate practices such as "slamming" (an
underhanded method of snitching clients from rivals) break out
with some regularity in the realm of long-distance service.  The
battle to break Bell's long-distance monopoly was long and ugly,
and since the breakup the battlefield has not become much
prettier.  AT&T's famous shame-and-blame advertisements, which
emphasized the shoddy work and purported ethical shadiness of
their competitors, were much remarked on for their studied
psychological cruelty.

  There is much bad blood in this industry, and much long-
treasured resentment.  AT&T's post-breakup corporate logo, a
striped sphere, is known in the industry as the "Death Star" (a
reference from the movie STAR WARS, in which the "Death Star" was
the spherical high-tech fortress of the harsh-breathing imperial
ultra-baddie, Darth Vader.)  Even AT&T employees are less than
thrilled by the Death Star.  A popular (though banned) T-shirt
among AT&T employees bears the old-fashioned Bell logo of the
Bell System, plus the newfangled striped sphere, with the before-
and-after comments:  "This is your brain--This is your brain on
drugs!"  AT&T made a very well-financed and determined effort to
break into the personal computer market; it was disastrous, and
telco computer experts are derisively known by their competitors
as "the pole-climbers."  AT&T and the Baby Bell arbocks still
seem to have few friends.

  Under conditions of sharp commercial competition, a crash
like that of January 15, 1990 was a major embarrassment to AT&T.
It was a direct blow against their much-treasured reputation for
reliability.  Within days of the crash AT&T's Chief Executive
Officer, Bob Allen, officially apologized, in terms of deeply
pained humility:



  "AT&T had a major service disruption last Monday.  We
didn't live up to our own standards of quality, and we didn't
live up to yours. It's as simple as that.  And that's not
acceptable to us.  Or to you.... We understand how much people
have come to depend upon AT&T service, so our AT&T Bell
Laboratories scientists and our network engineers are doing
everything possible to guard against a recurrence.... We know
there's no way to make up for the inconvenience this problem may
have caused you."



  Mr Allen's "open letter to customers" was printed in
lavish ads all over the country:  in the WALL STREET JOURNAL, USA
TODAY, NEW YORK TIMES, LOS ANGELES TIMES, CHICAGO TRIBUNE,
PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER, SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE EXAMINER, BOSTON
GLOBE, DALLAS MORNING NEWS, DETROIT FREE PRESS, WASHINGTON POST,
HOUSTON CHRONICLE, CLEVELAND PLAIN DEALER, ATLANTA JOURNAL
CONSTITUTION, MINNEAPOLIS STAR TRIBUNE, ST. PAUL PIONEER PRESS
DISPATCH, SEATTLE TIME/POST INTELLIGENCER, TACOMA NEWS TRIBUNE,
MIAMI HERALD, PITTSBURGH PRESS, ST. LOUIS POST DISPATCH, DENVER
POST, PHOENIX REPUBLIC GAZETTE and TAMPA TRIBUNE.

  In another press release, AT&T went to some pains to
suggest that this "software glitch" MIGHT have happened just as
easily to MCI, although, in fact, it hadn't.  (MCI's switching
software was quite different from AT&T's--though not necessarily
any safer.)  AT&T also announced their plans to offer a rebate of
service on Valentine's Day to make up for the loss during the
Crash.



  "Every technical resource available, including Bell Labs
scientists and engineers, has been devoted to assuring it will
not occur again," the public was told.  They were further assured
that "The chances of a recurrence are small--a problem of this
magnitude never occurred before."



  In the meantime, however, police and corporate security
maintained their own suspicions about "the chances of recurrence"
and the real reason why a "problem of this magnitude" had
appeared, seemingly out of nowhere.  Police and security knew for
a fact that hackers of unprecedented sophistication were
illegally entering, and reprogramming, certain digital switching
stations.  Rumors of hidden "viruses" and secret "logic bombs" in
the switches ran rampant in the underground, with much chortling
over AT&T's predicament, and idle speculation over what unsung
hacker genius was responsible for it.  Some hackers, including
police informants, were trying hard to finger one another as the
true culprits of the Crash.

  Telco people found little comfort in objectivity when
they contemplated these possibilities.  It was just too close to
the bone for them; it was embarrassing; it hurt so much, it was
hard even to talk about.

  There has always been thieving and misbehavior in the
phone system.  There has always been trouble with the rival
independents, and in the local loops.  But to have such trouble
in the core of the system, the long-distance switching stations,
is a horrifying affair.  To telco people, this is all the
difference between finding roaches in your kitchen and big horrid
sewer-rats in your bedroom.

  From the outside, to the average citizen, the telcos
still seem gigantic and impersonal.  The American public seems to
regard them as something akin to Soviet apparats.  Even when the
telcos do their best corporate-citizen routine, subsidizing
magnet high-schools and sponsoring news-shows on public
television, they seem to win little except public suspicion.

  But from the inside, all this looks very different.
There's harsh competition.  A legal and political system that
seems baffled and bored, when not actively hostile to telco
interests.  There's a loss of morale, a deep sensation of having
somehow lost the upper hand.  Technological change has caused a
loss of data and revenue to other, newer forms of transmission.
There's theft, and new forms of theft, of growing scale and
boldness and sophistication.  With all these factors, it was no
surprise to see the telcos, large and small, break out in a
litany of bitter complaint.

  In late '88 and throughout 1989, telco representatives
grew shrill in their complaints to those few American law
enforcement officials who make it their business to try to
understand what telephone people are talking about.  Telco
security officials had discovered the computer-hacker
underground, infiltrated it thoroughly, and become deeply alarmed
at its growing expertise.  Here they had found a target that was
not only loathsome on its face, but clearly ripe for
counterattack.

   Those bitter rivals: AT&T, MCI and Sprint--and a crowd
of Baby Bells:  PacBell, Bell South, Southwestern Bell, NYNEX,
USWest, as well as the Bell research consortium Bellcore, and the
independent long-distance carrier Mid-American--all were to have
their role in the great hacker dragnet of 1990.  After years of
being battered and pushed around, the telcos had, at least in a
small way, seized the initiative again.  After years of turmoil,
telcos and government officials were once again to work smoothly
in concert in defense of the System.  Optimism blossomed;
enthusiasm grew on all sides; the prospective taste of vengeance
was sweet.




  From the beginning--even before the crackdown had a name
--secrecy was a big problem.  There were many good reasons for
secrecy in the hacker crackdown.  Hackers and code-thieves were
wily prey, slinking back to their bedrooms and basements and
destroying vital incriminating evidence at the first hint of
trouble.  Furthermore, the crimes themselves were heavily
technical and difficult to describe, even to police--much less to
the general public.

  When such crimes HAD been described intelligibly to the
public, in the past, that very publicity had tended to INCREASE
the crimes enormously.  Telco officials, while painfully aware of
the vulnerabilities of their systems, were anxious not to
publicize those weaknesses.  Experience showed them that those
weaknesses, once discovered, would be pitilessly exploited by
tens of thousands of people--not only by professional grifters
and by underground hackers and phone phreaks, but by many
otherwise more-or-less honest everyday folks, who regarded
stealing service from the faceless, soulless "Phone Company" as a
kind of harmless indoor sport.  When it came to protecting their
interests, telcos had long since given up on general public
sympathy for "the Voice with a Smile."  Nowadays the telco's
"Voice" was very likely to be a computer's; and the American
public showed much less of the proper respect and gratitude due
the fine public service bequeathed them by Dr. Bell and Mr. Vail.
The more efficient, high-tech, computerized, and impersonal the
telcos became, it seemed, the more they were met by sullen public
resentment and amoral greed.

  Telco officials wanted to punish the phone-phreak
underground, in as public and exemplary a manner as possible.
They wanted to make dire examples of the worst offenders, to
seize the ringleaders and intimidate the small fry, to discourage
and frighten the wacky hobbyists, and send the professional
grifters to jail.  To do all this, publicity was vital.

  Yet operational secrecy was even more so.  If word got
out that a nationwide crackdown was coming, the hackers might
simply vanish; destroy the evidence, hide their computers, go to
earth, and wait for the campaign to blow over.  Even the young
hackers were crafty and suspicious, and as for the professional
grifters, they tended to split for the nearest state-line at the
first sign of trouble.  For the crackdown to work well, they
would all have to be caught red-handed, swept upon suddenly, out
of the blue, from every corner of the compass.

  And there was another strong motive for secrecy.  In the
worst-case scenario, a blown campaign might leave the telcos open
to a devastating hacker counter-attack.  If there were indeed
hackers loose in America who had caused the January 15 Crash--if
there were truly gifted hackers, loose in the nation's long-
distance switching systems, and enraged or frightened by the
crackdown--then they might react unpredictably to an attempt to
collar them.  Even if caught, they might have talented and
vengeful friends still running around loose.  Conceivably, it
could turn ugly.  Very ugly.  In fact, it was hard to imagine
just how ugly things might turn, given that possibility.

  Counter-attack from hackers was a genuine concern for the
telcos.  In point of fact, they would never suffer any such
counter-attack.  But in months to come, they would be at some
pains to publicize this notion and to utter grim warnings about
it.

  Still, that risk seemed well worth running.  Better to
run the risk of vengeful attacks, than to live at the mercy of
potential crashers.  Any cop would tell you that a protection
racket had no real future.

   And publicity was such a useful thing.  Corporate
security officers, including telco security, generally work under
conditions of great discretion.  And corporate security officials
do not make money for their companies. Their job is to PREVENT
THE LOSS of money, which is much less glamorous than actually
winning profits.

  If you are a corporate security official, and you do your
job brilliantly, then nothing bad happens to your company at all.
Because of this, you appear completely superfluous.  This is one
of the many unattractive aspects of security work.  It's rare
that these folks have the chance to draw some healthy attention
to their own efforts.

  Publicity also served the interest of their friends in
law enforcement.  Public officials, including law enforcement
officials, thrive by attracting favorable public interest.  A
brilliant prosecution in a matter of vital public interest can
make the career of a prosecuting attorney.  And for a police
officer, good publicity opens the purses of the legislature; it
may bring a citation, or a promotion, or at least a rise in
status and the respect of one's peers.

  But to have both publicity and secrecy is to have one's
cake and eat it too.  In months to come, as we will show, this
impossible act was to cause great pain to the agents of the
crackdown.  But early on, it seemed possible--maybe even likely--
that the crackdown could successfully combine the best of both
worlds.  The ARREST of hackers would be heavily publicized.  The
actual DEEDS of the hackers, which were technically hard to
explain and also a security risk, would be left decently
obscured.  The THREAT hackers posed would be heavily trumpeted;
the likelihood of their actually committing such fearsome crimes
would be left to the public's imagination.  The spread of the
computer underground, and its growing technical sophistication,
would be heavily promoted; the actual hackers themselves, mostly
bespectacled middle-class white suburban teenagers, would be
denied any personal publicity.

  It does not seem to have occurred to any telco official
that the hackers accused would demand a day in court; that
journalists would smile upon the hackers as "good copy;"  that
wealthy high-tech entrepreneurs would offer moral and financial
support to crackdown victims; that constitutional lawyers would
show up with briefcases, frowning mightily.  This possibility
does not seem to have ever entered the game-plan.

  And even if it had, it probably would not have slowed the
ferocious pursuit of a stolen phone-company document,
mellifluously known as "Control Office Administration of Enhanced
911 Services for Special Services and Major Account Centers."

  In the chapters to follow, we will explore the worlds of
police and the computer underground, and the large shadowy area
where they overlap.  But first, we must explore the battleground.
Before we leave the world of the telcos, we must understand what
a switching system actually is and how your telephone actually
works.




  To the average citizen, the idea of the telephone is
represented by, well, a TELEPHONE:  a device that you talk into.
To a telco professional, however, the telephone itself is known,
in lordly fashion, as a "subset."  The "subset" in your house is
a mere adjunct, a distant nerve ending, of the central switching
stations, which are ranked in levels of hierarchy, up to the
long-distance electronic switching stations, which are some of
the largest computers on earth.

  Let us imagine that it is, say, 1925, before the
introduction of computers, when the phone system was simpler and
somewhat easier to grasp.  Let's further imagine that you are
Miss Leticia Luthor, a fictional operator for Ma Bell in New York
City of the 20s.

  Basically, you, Miss Luthor, ARE the "switching system."
You are sitting in front of a large vertical switchboard, known
as a "cordboard," made of shiny wooden panels, with ten thousand
metal-rimmed holes punched in them, known as jacks.  The
engineers would have put more holes into your switchboard, but
ten thousand is as many as you can reach without actually having
to get up out of your chair.

   Each of these ten thousand holes has its own little
electric lightbulb, known as a "lamp," and its own neatly printed
number code.

   With the ease of long habit, you are scanning your board
for lit-up bulbs.  This is what you do most of the time, so you
are used to it.

  A lamp lights up.  This means that the phone at the end
of that line has been taken off the hook.  Whenever a handset is
taken off the hook, that closes a circuit inside the phone which
then signals the local office, i.e. you, automatically.  There
might be somebody calling, or then again the phone might be
simply off the hook, but this does not matter to you yet.  The
first thing you do, is record that number in your logbook, in
your fine American public-school handwriting.  This comes first,
naturally, since it is done for billing purposes.

  You now take the plug of your answering cord, which goes
directly to your headset, and plug it into the lit-up hole.
"Operator," you announce.

  In operator's classes, before taking this job, you have
been issued a large pamphlet full of canned operator's responses
for all kinds of contingencies, which you had to memorize.  You
have also been trained in a proper non-regional, non-ethnic
pronunciation and tone of voice.  You rarely have the occasion
to make any spontaneous remark to a customer, and in fact this is
frowned upon (except out on the rural lines where people have
time on their hands and get up to all kinds of mischief).

  A tough-sounding user's voice at the end of the line
gives you a number.  Immediately, you write that number down in
your logbook, next to the caller's number, which you just wrote
earlier.  You then look and see if the number this guy wants is
in fact on your switchboard, which it generally is, since it's
generally a local call.  Long distance costs so much that people
use it sparingly.

  Only then do you pick up a calling-cord from a shelf at
the base of the switchboard.  This is a long elastic cord mounted
on a kind of reel so that it will zip back in when you unplug it.
There are a lot of cords down there, and when a bunch of them are
out at once they look like a nest of snakes.  Some of the girls
think there are bugs living in those cable-holes.  They're called
"cable mites" and are supposed to bite your hands and give you
rashes.  You don't believe this, yourself.

  Gripping the head of your calling-cord, you slip the tip
of it deftly into the sleeve of the jack for the called person.
Not all the way in, though.  You just touch it.  If you hear a
clicking sound, that means the line is busy and you can't put the
call through.  If the line is busy, you have to stick the
calling-cord into a "busy-tone jack," which will give the guy a
busy-tone.  This way you don't have to talk to him yourself and
absorb his natural human frustration.

  But the line isn't busy.  So you pop the cord all the way
in.  Relay circuits in your board make the distant phone ring,
and if somebody picks it up off the hook, then a phone
conversation starts.  You can hear this conversation on your
answering cord, until you unplug it.  In fact you could listen to
the whole conversation if you wanted, but this is sternly frowned
upon by management, and frankly, when you've overheard one,
you've pretty much heard 'em all.

  You can tell how long the conversation lasts by the glow
of the calling-cord's lamp, down on the calling-cord's shelf.
When it's over, you unplug and the calling-cord zips back into
place.

  Having done this stuff a few hundred thousand times, you
become quite good at it.  In fact you're plugging, and
connecting, and disconnecting, ten, twenty, forty cords at a
time.  It's a manual handicraft, really, quite satisfying in a
way, rather like weaving on an upright loom.

  Should a long-distance call come up, it would be
different, but not all that different.  Instead of connecting the
call through your own local switchboard, you have to go up the
hierarchy, onto the long-distance lines, known as "trunklines."
Depending on how far the call goes, it may have to work its way
through a whole series of operators, which can take quite a
while.  The caller doesn't wait on the line while this complex
process is negotiated across the country by the gaggle of
operators.  Instead, the caller hangs up, and you call him back
yourself when the call has finally worked its way through.

  After four or five years of this work, you get married,
and you have to quit your job, this being the natural order of
womanhood in the American 1920s.  The phone company has to train
somebody else--maybe two people, since the phone system has grown
somewhat in the meantime.  And this costs money.

  In fact, to use any kind of human being as a switching
system is a very expensive proposition.  Eight thousand Leticia
Luthors would be bad enough, but a quarter of a million of them
is a military-scale proposition and makes drastic measures in
automation financially worthwhile.

  Although the phone system continues to grow today, the
number of human beings employed by telcos has been dropping
steadily for years.  Phone "operators" now deal with nothing but
unusual contingencies, all routine operations having been
shrugged off onto machines.  Consequently, telephone operators
are considerably less machine-like nowadays, and have been known
to have accents and actual character in their voices.  When you
reach a human operator today, the operators are rather more
"human" than they were in Leticia's day--but on the other hand,
human beings in the phone system are much harder to reach in the
first place.

  Over the first half of the twentieth century,
"electromechanical" switching systems of growing complexity were
cautiously introduced into the phone system.  In certain
backwaters, some of these hybrid systems are still in use.  But
after 1965, the phone system began to go completely electronic,
and this is by far the dominant mode today.  Electromechanical
systems have "crossbars," and "brushes," and other large moving
mechanical parts, which, while faster and cheaper than Leticia,
are still slow, and tend to wear out fairly quickly.

  But fully electronic systems are inscribed on silicon
chips, and are lightning-fast, very cheap, and quite durable.
They are much cheaper to maintain than even the best
electromechanical systems, and they fit into half the space.  And
with every year, the silicon chip grows smaller, faster, and
cheaper yet.  Best of all, automated electronics work around the
clock and don't have salaries or health insurance.

  There are, however, quite serious drawbacks to the use of
computer-chips.  When they do break down, it is a daunting
challenge to figure out what the heck has gone wrong with them.
A broken cordboard generally had a problem in it big enough to
see.  A broken chip has invisible, microscopic faults.  And the
faults in bad software can be so subtle as to be practically
theological.

  If you want a mechanical system to do something new, then
you must travel to where it is, and pull pieces out of it, and
wire in new pieces.  This costs money.  However, if you want a
chip to do something new, all you have to do is change its
software, which is easy, fast and dirt-cheap.  You don't even
have to see the chip to change its program.  Even if you did see
the chip, it wouldn't look like much.  A chip with program X
doesn't look one whit different from a chip with program Y.

  With the proper codes and sequences, and access to
specialized phone-lines, you can change electronic switching
systems all over America from anywhere you please.

  And so can other people.  If they know how, and if they
want to, they can sneak into a microchip via the special
phonelines and diddle with it, leaving no physical trace at all.
If they broke into the operator's station and held Leticia at
gunpoint, that would be very obvious.  If they broke into a telco
building and went after an electromechanical switch with a
toolbelt, that would at least leave many traces.  But people can
do all manner of amazing things to computer switches just by
typing on a keyboard, and keyboards are everywhere today.  The
extent of this vulnerability is deep, dark, broad, almost mind-
boggling, and yet this is a basic, primal fact of life about any
computer on a network.

  Security experts over the past twenty years have
insisted, with growing urgency, that this basic vulnerability of
computers represents an entirely new level of risk, of unknown
but obviously dire potential to society.  And they are right.

  An electronic switching station does pretty much
everything Letitia did, except in nanoseconds and on a much
larger scale.  Compared to Miss Luthor's ten thousand jacks, even
a primitive 1ESS switching computer, 60s vintage, has a 128,000
lines.  And the current AT&T system of choice is the monstrous
fifth-generation 5ESS.

  An Electronic Switching Station can scan every line on
its "board" in a tenth of a second, and it does this over and
over, tirelessly, around the clock.  Instead of eyes, it uses
"ferrod scanners" to check the condition of local lines and
trunks.  Instead of hands, it has "signal distributors," "central
pulse distributors," "magnetic latching relays," and "reed
switches," which complete and break the calls.  Instead of a
brain, it has a "central processor."  Instead of an instruction
manual, it has a program.  Instead of a handwritten logbook for
recording and billing calls, it has magnetic tapes. And it never
has to talk to anybody.  Everything a customer might say to it is
done by punching the direct-dial tone buttons on your subset.

  Although an Electronic Switching Station can't talk, it
does need an interface, some way to relate to its, er, employers.
This interface is known as the "master control center."  (This
interface might be better known simply as "the interface," since
it doesn't actually "control" phone calls directly.  However, a
term like "Master Control Center" is just the kind of rhetoric
that telco maintenance engineers--and hackers--find particularly
satisfying.)

  Using the master control center, a phone engineer can
test local and trunk lines for malfunctions.  He (rarely she) can
check various alarm displays, measure traffic on the lines,
examine the records of telephone usage and the charges for those
calls, and change the programming.

  And, of course, anybody else who gets into the master
control center by remote control can also do these things, if he
(rarely she) has managed to figure them out, or, more likely, has
somehow swiped the knowledge from people who already know.

  In 1989 and 1990, one particular RBOC, BellSouth, which
felt particularly troubled, spent a purported $1.2 million on
computer security.  Some think it spent as much as two million,
if you count all the associated costs.  Two million dollars is
still very little compared to the great cost-saving utility of
telephonic computer systems.

  Unfortunately, computers are also stupid.  Unlike human
beings, computers possess the truly profound stupidity of the
inanimate.

  In the 1960s, in the first shocks of spreading
computerization, there was much easy talk about the stupidity of
computers--how they could "only follow the program" and were
rigidly required to do "only what they were told."  There has
been rather less talk about the stupidity of computers since they
began to achieve grandmaster status in chess tournaments, and to
manifest many other impressive forms of apparent cleverness.

  Nevertheless, computers STILL are profoundly brittle and
stupid; they are simply vastly more subtle in their stupidity and
brittleness.  The computers of the 1990s are much more reliable
in their components than earlier computer systems, but they are
also called upon to do far more complex things, under far more
challenging conditions.

  On a basic mathematical level, every single line of a
software program offers a chance for some possible screwup.
Software does not sit still when it works; it "runs," it
interacts with itself and with its own inputs and outputs.  By
analogy, it stretches like putty into millions of possible shapes
and conditions, so many shapes that they can never all be
successfully tested, not even in the lifespan of the universe.
Sometimes the putty snaps.

  The stuff we call "software" is not like anything that
human society is used to thinking about.  Software is something
like a machine, and something like mathematics, and something
like language, and something like thought, and art, and
information.... but software is not in fact any of those other
things.  The protean quality of software is one of the great
sources of its fascination.  It also makes software very
powerful, very subtle, very unpredictable, and very risky.

  Some software is bad and buggy.  Some is "robust," even
"bulletproof."  The best software is that which has been tested
by thousands of users under thousands of different conditions,
over years.  It is then known as "stable."  This does NOT mean
that the software is now flawless, free of bugs.  It generally
means that there are plenty of bugs in it, but the bugs are well-
identified and fairly well understood.

  There is simply no way to assure that software is free of
flaws.  Though software is mathematical in nature, it cannot by
"proven" like a mathematical theorem; software is more like
language, with inherent ambiguities, with different definitions,
different assumptions, different levels of meaning that can
conflict.

  Human beings can manage, more or less, with human
language because we can catch the gist of it.

  Computers, despite years of effort in "artificial
intelligence," have proven spectacularly bad in "catching the
gist" of anything at all.  The tiniest bit of semantic grit may
still bring the mightiest computer tumbling down.  One of the
most hazardous things you can do to a computer program is try to
improve it--to try to make it safer.  Software "patches"
represent new, untried un-"stable" software, which is by
definition riskier.

  The modern telephone system has come to depend, utterly
and irretrievably, upon software.  And the System Crash of
January 15, 1990, was caused by an IMPROVEMENT in software.  Or
rather, an ATTEMPTED improvement.

  As it happened, the problem itself--the problem per se --
took this form.  A piece of telco software had been written in C
language, a standard language of the telco field.  Within the C
software was a long "do... while" construct.  The "do... while"
construct contained a "switch" statement.  The "switch" statement
contained an "if" clause.  The "if" clause contained a "break."
The "break" was SUPPOSED to "break" the "if clause."  Instead,
the "break" broke the "switch" statement.

  That was the problem, the actual reason why people
picking up phones on January 15, 1990, could not talk to one
another.

  Or at least, that was the subtle, abstract, cyberspatial
seed of the problem.  This is how the problem manifested itself
from the realm of programming into the realm of real life.

  The System 7 software for AT&T's 4ESS switching station,
the "Generic 44E14 Central Office Switch Software," had been
extensively tested, and was considered very stable.  By the end
of 1989, eighty of AT&T's switching systems nationwide had been
programmed with the new software.  Cautiously, thirty-four
stations were left to run the slower, less-capable System 6,
because AT&T suspected there might be shakedown problems with the
new and unprecedently sophisticated System 7 network.

  The stations with System 7 were programmed to switch over
to a backup net in case of any problems.  In mid-December 1989,
however, a new high-velocity, high-security software patch was
distributed to each of the 4ESS switches that would enable them
to switch over even more quickly, making the System 7 network
that much more secure.

  Unfortunately, every one of these 4ESS switches was now
in possession of a small but deadly flaw.

  In order to maintain the network, switches must monitor
the condition of other switches--whether they are up and running,
whether they have temporarily shut down, whether they are
overloaded and in need of assistance, and so forth.  The new
software helped control this bookkeeping function by monitoring
the status calls from other switches.

  It only takes four to six seconds for a troubled 4ESS
switch to rid itself of all its calls, drop everything
temporarily, and re-boot its software from scratch.  Starting
over from scratch will generally rid the switch of any software
problems that may have developed in the course of running the
system.  Bugs that arise will be simply wiped out by this
process.  It is a clever idea.  This process of automatically re-
booting from scratch is known as the "normal fault recovery
routine."  Since AT&T's software is in fact exceptionally stable,
systems rarely have to go into "fault recovery" in the first
place; but AT&T has always boasted of its "real world"
reliability, and this tactic is a belt-and-suspenders routine.

  The 4ESS switch used its new software to monitor its
fellow switches as they recovered from faults.  As other switches
came back on line after recovery, they would send their "OK"
signals to the switch.  The switch would make a little note to
that effect in its "status map," recognizing that the fellow
switch was back and ready to go, and should be sent some calls
and put back to regular work.

  Unfortunately, while it was busy bookkeeping with the
status map, the tiny flaw in the brand-new software came into
play.  The flaw caused the 4ESS switch to interacted, subtly but
drastically, with incoming telephone calls from human users.
If--and only if--two incoming phone-calls happened to hit the
switch within a hundredth of a second, then a small patch of data
would be garbled by the flaw.

  But the switch had been programmed to monitor itself
constantly for any possible damage to its data.  When the switch
perceived that its data had been somehow garbled, then it too
would go down, for swift repairs to its software.  It would
signal its fellow switches not to send any more work.  It would
go into the fault-recovery mode for four to six seconds.  And
then the switch would be fine again, and would send out its "OK,
ready for work" signal.

  However, the "OK, ready for work" signal was the VERY
THING THAT CAUSED THE SWITCH TO GO DOWN IN THE FIRST PLACE.  And
ALL the System 7 switches had the same flaw in their status-map
software.  As soon as they stopped to make the bookkeeping note
that their fellow switch was "OK," then they too would become
vulnerable to the slight chance that two phone-calls would hit
them within a hundredth of a second.

  At approximately 2:25 p.m. EST on Monday, January 15, one
of AT&T's 4ESS toll switching systems in New York City had an
actual, legitimate, minor problem.  It went into fault recovery
routines, announced "I'm going down," then announced, "I'm back,
I'm OK."  And this cheery message then blasted throughout the
network to many of its fellow 4ESS switches.

  Many of the switches, at first, completely escaped
trouble.  These lucky switches were not hit by the coincidence of
two phone calls within a hundredth of a second.  Their software
did not fail--at first.  But three switches--in Atlanta, St.
Louis, and Detroit--were unlucky, and were caught with their
hands full.  And they went down.  And they came back up, almost
immediately.  And they too began to broadcast the lethal message
that they, too, were "OK" again, activating the lurking software
bug in yet other switches.

  As more and more switches did have that bit of bad luck
and collapsed, the call-traffic became more and more densely
packed in the remaining switches, which were groaning to keep up
with the load.  And of course, as the calls became more densely
packed, the switches were MUCH MORE LIKELY to be hit twice within
a hundredth of a second.

  It only took four seconds for a switch to get well.
There was no PHYSICAL damage of any kind to the switches, after
all.  Physically, they were working perfectly.  This situation
was "only" a software problem.

  But the 4ESS switches were leaping up and down every four
to six seconds, in a virulent spreading wave all over America, in
utter, manic, mechanical stupidity.  They kept KNOCKING one
another down with their contagious "OK" messages.

  It took about ten minutes for the chain reaction to
cripple the network.  Even then, switches would periodically
luck-out and manage to resume their normal work.  Many calls--
millions of them--were managing to get through.  But millions
weren't.

  The switching stations that used System 6 were not
directly affected.  Thanks to these old-fashioned switches,
AT&T's national system avoided complete collapse.  This fact also
made it clear to engineers that System 7 was at fault.

  Bell Labs engineers, working feverishly in New Jersey,
Illinois, and Ohio, first tried their entire repertoire of
standard network remedies on the malfunctioning System 7.  None
of the remedies worked, of course, because nothing like this had
ever happened to any phone system before.

  By cutting out the backup safety network entirely, they
were able to reduce the frenzy of "OK" messages by about half.
The system then began to recover, as the chain reaction slowed.
By 11:30 pm on Monday January 15, sweating engineers on the
midnight shift breathed a sigh of relief as the last switch
cleared-up.

  By Tuesday they were pulling all the brand-new 4ESS
software and replacing it with an earlier version of System 7.

  If these had been human operators, rather than computers
at work, someone would simply have eventually stopped screaming.
It would have been OBVIOUS that the situation was not "OK," and
common sense would have kicked in.  Humans possess common sense
--at least to some extent.  Computers simply don't.

  On the other hand, computers can handle hundreds of calls
per second.  Humans simply can't.  If every single human being in
America worked for the phone company, we couldn't match the
performance of digital switches:  direct-dialling, three-way
calling, speed-calling, call-waiting, Caller ID, all the rest of
the cornucopia of digital bounty.  Replacing computers with
operators is simply not an option any more.

  And yet we still, anachronistically, expect humans to be
running our phone system.  It is hard for us to understand that
we have sacrificed huge amounts of initiative and control to
senseless yet powerful machines.  When the phones fail, we want
somebody to be responsible.  We want somebody to blame.

  When the Crash of January 15 happened, the American
populace was simply not prepared to understand that enormous
landslides in cyberspace, like the Crash itself, can happen, and
can be nobody's fault in particular.  It was easier to believe,
maybe even in some odd way more reassuring to believe, that some
evil person, or evil group, had done this to us.  "Hackers" had
done it.  With a virus.  A trojan horse.  A software bomb.  A
dirty plot of some kind.  People believed this, responsible
people.  In 1990, they were looking hard for evidence to confirm
their heartfelt suspicions.

  And they would look in a lot of places.

  Come 1991, however, the outlines of an apparent new
reality would begin to emerge from the fog.

  On July 1 and 2, 1991, computer-software collapses in
telephone switching stations disrupted service in Washington DC,
Pittsburgh, Los Angeles and San Francisco.  Once again, seemingly
minor maintenance problems had crippled the digital System 7.
About twelve million people were affected in the Crash of July 1,
1991.

  Said the New York Times Service:  "Telephone company
executives and federal regulators said they were not ruling out
the possibility of sabotage by computer hackers, but most seemed
to think the problems stemmed from some unknown defect in the
software running the networks."

  And sure enough, within the week, a red-faced software
company, DSC Communications Corporation of Plano, Texas, owned up
to "glitches" in the "signal transfer point" software that DSC
had designed for Bell Atlantic and Pacific Bell.  The immediate
cause of the July 1 Crash was a single mistyped character:  one
tiny typographical flaw in one single line of the software.  One
mistyped letter, in one single line, had deprived the nation's
capital of phone service.  It was not particularly surprising
that this tiny flaw had escaped attention: a typical System 7
station requires TEN MILLION lines of code.

  On Tuesday, September 17, 1991, came the most spectacular
outage yet.  This case had nothing to do with software failures--
at least, not directly.  Instead, a group of AT&T's switching
stations in New York City had simply run out of electrical power
and shut down cold.  Their back-up batteries had failed.
Automatic warning systems were supposed to warn of the loss of
battery power, but those automatic systems had failed as well.

  This time, Kennedy, La Guardia, and Newark airports all
had their voice and data communications cut.  This horrifying
event was particularly ironic, as attacks on airport computers by
hackers had long been a standard nightmare scenario, much
trumpeted by computer-security experts who feared the computer
underground.  There had even been a Hollywood thriller about
sinister hackers ruining airport computers--DIE HARD II. Now AT&T
itself had crippled airports with computer malfunctions--not just
one airport, but three at once, some of the busiest in the world.

  Air traffic came to a standstill throughout the Greater
New York area, causing more than 500 flights to be cancelled, in
a spreading wave all over America and even into Europe.  Another
500 or so flights were delayed, affecting, all in all, about
85,000 passengers.  (One of these passengers was the chairman of
the Federal Communications Commission.)

  Stranded passengers in New York and New Jersey were
further infuriated to discover that they could not even manage to
make a long distance phone call, to explain their delay to loved
ones or business associates.  Thanks to the crash, about four and
a half million domestic calls, and half a million international
calls, failed to get through.

  The September 17 NYC Crash, unlike the previous ones,
involved not a whisper of "hacker" misdeeds.  On the contrary, by
1991, AT&T itself was suffering much of the vilification that had
formerly been directed at hackers.  Congressmen were grumbling.
So were state and federal regulators.  And so was the press.

  For their part, ancient rival MCI took out snide full-
page newspaper ads in New York, offering their own long-distance
services for the "next time that AT&T goes down."

  "You wouldn't find a classy company like AT&T using such
advertising," protested AT&T Chairman Robert Allen,
unconvincingly.  Once again, out came the full-page AT&T
apologies in newspapers, apologies for "an inexcusable
culmination of both human and mechanical failure."  (This time,
however, AT&T offered no discount on later calls.  Unkind critics
suggested that AT&T were worried about setting any precedent for
refunding the financial losses caused by telephone crashes.)

  Industry journals asked publicly if AT&T was "asleep at
the switch."  The telephone network, America's purported marvel
of high-tech reliability, had gone down three times in 18 months.
FORTUNE magazine listed the Crash of September 17 among the
"Biggest Business Goofs of 1991," cruelly parodying AT&T's ad
campaign in an article entitled "AT&T Wants You Back (Safely On
the Ground, God Willing)."

  Why had those New York switching systems simply run out
of power?  Because no human being had attended to the alarm
system.  Why did the alarm systems blare automatically, without
any human being noticing?  Because the three telco technicians
who SHOULD have been listening were absent from their stations in
the power-room, on another floor of the building--attending a
training class.  A training class about the alarm systems for the
power room!

  "Crashing the System" was no longer "unprecedented" by
late 1991.  On the contrary, it no longer even seemed an oddity.
By 1991, it was clear that all the policemen in the world could
no longer "protect" the phone system from crashes.  By far the
worst crashes the system had ever had, had been inflicted, by the
system, upon ITSELF.  And this time nobody was making cocksure
statements that this was an anomaly, something that would never
happen again.  By 1991 the System's defenders had met their
nebulous Enemy, and the Enemy was--the System.





PART TWO:  THE DIGITAL UNDERGROUND


  The date was May 9, 1990.  The Pope was touring Mexico
City.  Hustlers from the Medellin Cartel were trying to buy
black-market Stinger missiles in Florida.  On the comics page,
Doonesbury character Andy was dying of AIDS.  And then.... a
highly unusual item whose novelty and calculated rhetoric won it
headscratching attention in newspapers all over America.

  The US Attorney's office in Phoenix, Arizona, had issued
a press release announcing a nationwide law enforcement crackdown
against "illegal computer hacking activities."  The sweep was
officially known as "Operation Sundevil."

  Eight paragraphs in the press release gave the bare
facts:  twenty-seven search warrants carried out on May 8, with
three arrests, and a hundred and fifty agents on the prowl in
"twelve" cities across America.  (Different counts in local press
reports yielded "thirteen," "fourteen," and "sixteen" cities.)
Officials estimated that criminal losses of revenue to telephone
companies "may run into millions of dollars."  Credit for the
Sundevil investigations was taken by the US Secret Service,
Assistant US Attorney Tim Holtzen of Phoenix, and the Assistant
Attorney General of Arizona, Gail Thackeray.

  The prepared remarks of Garry M. Jenkins, appearing in a
U.S. Department of Justice press release, were of particular
interest.  Mr. Jenkins was the Assistant Director of the US
Secret Service, and the highest-ranking federal official to take
any direct public role in the hacker crackdown of 1990.



  "Today, the Secret Service is sending a clear message to
those computer hackers who have decided to violate the laws of
this nation in the mistaken belief that they can successfully
avoid detection by hiding behind the relative anonymity of their
computer terminals.(...)

  "Underground groups have been formed for the purpose of
exchanging information relevant to their criminal activities.
These groups often communicate with each other through message
systems between computers called 'bulletin boards.'

  "Our experience shows that many computer hacker suspects
are no longer misguided teenagers, mischievously playing games
with their computers in their bedrooms.  Some are now high tech
computer operators using computers to engage in unlawful
conduct."



  Who were these "underground groups" and "high-tech
operators?"  Where had they come from?  What did they want?  Who
WERE they?  Were they "mischievous?"  Were they dangerous?  How
had "misguided teenagers" managed to alarm the United States
Secret Service?  And just how widespread was this sort of thing?

  Of all the major players in the Hacker Crackdown:  the
phone companies, law enforcement, the civil libertarians, and the
"hackers" themselves--the "hackers" are by far the most
mysterious, by far the hardest to understand, by far the
WEIRDEST.

  Not only are "hackers" novel in their activities, but
they come in a variety of odd subcultures, with a variety of
languages, motives and values.

  The earliest proto-hackers were probably those unsung
mischievous telegraph boys who were summarily fired by the Bell
Company in 1878.

  Legitimate "hackers," those computer enthusiasts who are
independent-minded but law-abiding, generally trace their
spiritual ancestry to elite technical universities, especially
M.I.T. and Stanford, in the 1960s.

  But the genuine roots of the modern hacker UNDERGROUND
can probably be traced most successfully to a now much-obscured
hippie anarchist movement known as the Yippies.  The Yippies,
who took their name from the largely fictional "Youth
International Party," carried out a loud and lively policy of
surrealistic subversion and outrageous political mischief.  Their
basic tenets were flagrant sexual promiscuity, open and copious
drug use, the political overthrow of any powermonger over thirty
years of age, and an immediate end to the war in Vietnam, by any
means necessary, including the psychic levitation of the
Pentagon.

  The two most visible Yippies were Abbie Hoffman and Jerry
Rubin.  Rubin eventually became a Wall Street broker.  Hoffman,
ardently sought by federal authorities, went into hiding for
seven years, in Mexico, France, and the United States.  While on
the lam, Hoffman continued to write and publish, with help from
sympathizers in the American anarcho-leftist underground.
Mostly, Hoffman survived through false ID and odd jobs.
Eventually he underwent facial plastic surgery and adopted an
entirely new identity as one "Barry Freed."  After surrendering
himself to authorities in 1980, Hoffman spent a year in prison on
a cocaine conviction.

  Hoffman's worldview grew much darker as the glory days of
the 1960s faded.  In 1989, he purportedly committed suicide,
under odd and, to some, rather suspicious circumstances.

  Abbie Hoffman is said to have caused the Federal Bureau
of Investigation to amass the single largest investigation file
ever opened on an individual American citizen.  (If this is true,
it is still questionable whether the FBI regarded Abbie Hoffman a
serious public threat--quite possibly, his file was enormous
simply because Hoffman left colorful legendry wherever he went).
He was a gifted publicist, who regarded electronic media as both
playground and weapon.  He actively enjoyed manipulating network
TV and other gullible, image-hungry media, with various weird
lies, mindboggling rumors, impersonation scams, and other
sinister distortions, all absolutely guaranteed to upset cops,
Presidential candidates, and federal judges.  Hoffman's most
famous work was a book self-reflexively known as STEAL THIS BOOK,
which publicized a number of methods by which young, penniless
hippie agitators might live off the fat of a system supported by
humorless drones.  STEAL THIS BOOK, whose title urged readers to
damage the very means of distribution which had put it into their
hands, might be described as a spiritual ancestor of a computer
virus.

  Hoffman, like many a later conspirator, made extensive
use of pay-phones for his agitation work--in his case, generally
through the use of cheap brass washers as coin-slugs.

  During the Vietnam War, there was a federal surtax
imposed on telephone service; Hoffman and his cohorts could, and
did, argue that in systematically stealing phone service they
were engaging in civil disobedience:  virtuously denying tax
funds to an illegal and immoral war.

  But this thin veil of decency was soon dropped entirely.
Ripping-off the System found its own justification in deep
alienation and a basic outlaw contempt for conventional
bourgeois values.  Ingenious, vaguely politicized varieties of
rip-off, which might be described as "anarchy by convenience,"
became very popular in Yippie circles, and because rip-off was so
useful, it was to survive the Yippie movement itself.

  In the early 1970s, it required fairly limited expertise
and ingenuity to cheat payphones, to divert "free" electricity
and gas service, or to rob vending machines and parking meters
for handy pocket change.  It also required a conspiracy to spread
this knowledge, and the gall and nerve actually to commit petty
theft, but the Yippies had these qualifications in plenty.  In
June 1971, Abbie Hoffman and a telephone enthusiast sarcastically
known as "Al Bell" began publishing a newsletter called YOUTH
INTERNATIONAL PARTY LINE.  This newsletter was dedicated to
collating and spreading Yippie rip-off techniques, especially of
phones, to the joy of the freewheeling underground and the
insensate rage of all straight people.

  As a political tactic, phone-service theft ensured that
Yippie advocates would always have ready access to the long-
distance telephone as a medium, despite the Yippies' chronic lack
of organization, discipline, money, or even a steady home
address.

  PARTY LINE was run out of Greenwich Village for a couple
of years, then "Al Bell" more or less defected from the faltering
ranks of Yippiedom, changing the newsletter's name to _TAP_ or
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.  After the Vietnam War ended, the
steam began leaking rapidly out of American radical dissent.  But
by this time, "Bell" and his dozen or so core contributors had
the bit between their teeth, and had begun to derive tremendous
gut-level satisfaction from the sensation of pure TECHNICAL
POWER.

  _TAP_ articles, once highly politicized, became
pitilessly jargonized and technical, in homage or parody to the
Bell System's own technical documents, which _TAP_ studied
closely, gutted, and reproduced without permission.  The _TAP_
elite revelled in gloating possession of the specialized
knowledge necessary to beat the system.

  "Al Bell" dropped out of the game by the late 70s, and
"Tom Edison" took over; TAP readers (some 1400 of them, all
told) now began to show more interest in telex switches and the
growing phenomenon of computer systems.

  In 1983, "Tom Edison" had his computer stolen and his
house set on fire by an arsonist.  This was an eventually mortal
blow to _TAP_ (though the legendary name was to be resurrected in
1990 by a young Kentuckian computer-outlaw named "Predat0r.")




  Ever since telephones began to make money, there have
been people willing to rob and defraud phone companies.  The
legions of petty phone thieves vastly outnumber those "phone
phreaks" who "explore the system" for the sake of the
intellectual challenge.  The New York metropolitan area (long in
the vanguard of American crime) claims over 150,000 physical
attacks on pay telephones every year!  Studied carefully, a
modern payphone reveals itself as a little fortress, carefully
designed and redesigned over generations, to resist coin-slugs,
zaps of electricity, chunks of coin-shaped ice, prybars, magnets,
lockpicks, blasting caps.  Public pay-phones must survive in a
world of unfriendly, greedy people, and a modern payphone is as
exquisitely evolved as a cactus.

  Because the phone network pre-dates the computer network,
the scofflaws known as "phone phreaks" pre-date the scofflaws
known as "computer hackers."  In practice, today, the line
between "phreaking" and "hacking" is very blurred, just as the
distinction between telephones and computers has blurred.  The
phone system has been digitized, and computers have learned to
"talk" over phone-lines.  What's worse--and this was the point of
the Mr. Jenkins of the Secret Service--some hackers have learned
to steal, and some thieves have learned to hack.

  Despite the blurring, one can still draw a few useful
behavioral distinctions between "phreaks" and "hackers."  Hackers
are intensely interested in the "system" per se, and enjoy
relating to machines.  "Phreaks" are more social, manipulating
the system in a rough-and-ready fashion in order to get through
to other human beings, fast, cheap and under the table.

  Phone phreaks love nothing so much as "bridges," illegal
conference calls of ten or twelve chatting conspirators, seaboard
to seaboard, lasting for many hours--and running, of course, on
somebody else's tab, preferably a large corporation's.

  As phone-phreak conferences wear on, people drop out (or
simply leave the phone off the hook, while they sashay off to
work or school or babysitting), and new people are phoned up and
invited to join in, from some other continent, if possible.
Technical trivia, boasts, brags, lies, head-trip deceptions,
weird rumors, and cruel gossip are all freely exchanged.

  The lowest rung of phone-phreaking is the theft of
telephone access codes.  Charging a phone call to somebody else's
stolen number is, of course, a pig-easy way of stealing phone
service, requiring practically no technical expertise.  This
practice has been very widespread, especially among lonely people
without much money who are far from home.  Code theft has
flourished especially in college dorms, military bases, and,
notoriously, among roadies for rock bands.  Of late, code theft
has spread very rapidly among Third Worlders in the US, who pile
up enormous unpaid long-distance bills to the Caribbean, South
America, and Pakistan.

  The simplest way to steal phone-codes is simply to look
over a victim's shoulder as he punches-in his own code-number on
a public payphone.  This technique is known as "shoulder-
surfing," and is especially common in airports, bus terminals,
and train stations.  The code is then sold by the thief for a few
dollars.  The buyer abusing the code has no computer expertise,
but calls his Mom in New York, Kingston or Caracas and runs up a
huge bill with impunity.  The losses from this primitive
phreaking activity are far, far greater than the monetary losses
caused by computer-intruding hackers.

  In the mid-to-late 1980s, until the introduction of
sterner telco security measures, COMPUTERIZED code theft worked
like a charm, and was virtually omnipresent throughout the
digital underground, among phreaks and hackers alike.  This was
accomplished through programming one's computer to try random
code numbers over the telephone until one of them worked.  Simple
programs to do this were widely available in the underground; a
computer running all night was likely to come up with a dozen or
so useful hits.  This could be repeated week after week until one
had a large library of stolen codes.

  Nowadays, the computerized dialling of hundreds of
numbers can be detected within hours and swiftly traced.  If a
stolen code is repeatedly abused, this too can be detected within
a few hours.  But for years in the 1980s, the publication of
stolen codes was a kind of elementary etiquette for fledgling
hackers.  The simplest way to establish your bona-fides as a
raider was to steal a code through repeated random dialling and
offer it to the "community" for use.  Codes could be both stolen,
and used, simply and easily from the safety of one's own bedroom,
with very little fear of detection or punishment.

  Before computers and their phone-line modems entered
American homes in gigantic numbers, phone phreaks had their own
special telecommunications hardware gadget, the famous "blue
box."  This fraud device (now rendered increasingly useless by
the digital evolution of the phone system) could trick switching
systems into granting free access to long-distance lines.  It did
this by mimicking the system's own signal, a tone of 2600 hertz.

  Steven Jobs and Steve Wozniak, the founders of Apple
Computer, Inc., once dabbled in selling blue-boxes in college
dorms in California.  For many, in the early days of phreaking,
blue-boxing was scarcely perceived as "theft," but rather as a
fun (if sneaky) way to use excess phone capacity harmlessly.
After all, the long-distance lines were JUST SITTING THERE....
Whom did it hurt, really?  If you're not DAMAGING the system, and
you're not USING UP ANY TANGIBLE RESOURCE, and if nobody FIND OUT
what you did, then what real harm have you done?  What exactly
HAVE you "stolen," anyway?  If a tree falls in the forest and
nobody hears it, how much is the noise worth?  Even now this
remains a rather dicey question.

  Blue-boxing was no joke to the phone companies, however.
Indeed, when RAMPARTS magazine, a radical publication in
California, printed the wiring schematics necessary to create a
mute box in June 1972, the magazine was seized by police and
Pacific Bell phone-company officials.  The mute box, a blue-box
variant, allowed its user to receive long-distance calls free of
charge to the caller.  This device was closely described in a
RAMPARTS article wryly titled "Regulating the Phone Company In
Your Home."  Publication of this article was held to be in
violation of Californian State Penal Code section 502.7, which
outlaws ownership of wire-fraud devices and the selling of "plans
or instructions for any instrument, apparatus, or device intended
to avoid telephone toll charges."

  Issues of RAMPARTS were recalled or seized on the
newsstands, and the resultant loss of income helped put the
magazine out of business.  This was an ominous precedent for
free-expression issues, but the telco's crushing of a radical-
fringe magazine passed without serious challenge at the time.
Even in the freewheeling California 1970s, it was widely felt
that there was something sacrosanct about what the phone company
knew; that the telco had a legal and moral right to protect
itself by shutting off the flow of such illicit information.
Most telco information was so "specialized" that it would
scarcely be understood by any honest member of the public.  If
not published, it would not be missed.  To print such material
did not seem part of the legitimate role of a free press.

  In 1990 there would be a similar telco-inspired attack on
the electronic phreak/hacking "magazine" PHRACK. The PHRACK legal
case became a central issue in the Hacker Crackdown, and gave
rise to great controversy.  PHRACK would also be shut down, for a
time, at least, but this time both the telcos and their law-
enforcement allies would pay a much larger price for their
actions.  The PHRACK case will be examined in detail, later.

  Phone-phreaking as a social practice is still very much
alive at this moment.  Today, phone-phreaking is thriving much
more vigorously than the better-known and worse-feared practice
of "computer hacking."  New forms of phreaking are spreading
rapidly, following new vulnerabilities in sophisticated phone
services.

  Cellular phones are especially vulnerable; their chips
can be re-programmed to present a false caller ID and avoid
billing.  Doing so also avoids police tapping, making cellular-
phone abuse a favorite among drug-dealers.  "Call-sell
operations" using pirate cellular phones can, and have, been run
right out of the backs of cars, which move from "cell" to "cell"
in the local phone system, retailing stolen long-distance
service, like some kind of demented electronic version of the
neighborhood ice-cream truck.

  Private branch-exchange phone systems in large
corporations can be penetrated; phreaks dial-up a local company,
enter its internal phone-system, hack it, then use the company's
own PBX system to dial back out over the public network, causing
the company to be stuck with the resulting long-distance bill.
This technique is known as "diverting."  "Diverting" can be very
costly, especially because phreaks tend to travel in packs and
never stop talking.  Perhaps the worst by-product of this "PBX
fraud" is that victim companies and telcos have sued one another
over the financial responsibility for the stolen calls, thus
enriching not only shabby phreaks but well-paid lawyers.

  "Voice-mail systems" can also be abused; phreaks can
seize their own sections of these sophisticated electronic
answering machines, and use them for trading codes or knowledge
of illegal techniques.  Voice-mail abuse does not hurt the
company directly, but finding supposedly empty slots in your
company's answering machine all crammed with phreaks eagerly
chattering and hey-duding one another in impenetrable jargon can
cause sensations of almost mystical repulsion and dread.

  Worse yet, phreaks have sometimes been known to react
truculently to attempts to "clean up" the voice-mail system.
Rather than humbly acquiescing to being thrown out of their
playground, they may very well call up the company officials at
work (or at home) and loudly demand free voice-mail addresses of
their very own.  Such bullying is taken very seriously by spooked
victims.

  Acts of phreak revenge against straight people are rare,
but voice-mail systems are especially tempting and vulnerable,
and an infestation of angry phreaks in one's voice-mail system is
no joke.  They can erase legitimate messages; or spy on private
messages; or harass users with recorded taunts and obscenities.
They've even been known to seize control of voice-mail security,
and lock out legitimate users, or even shut down the system
entirely.

  Cellular phone-calls, cordless phones, and ship-to-shore
telephony can all be monitored by various forms of radio; this
kind of "passive monitoring" is spreading explosively today.
Technically eavesdropping on other people's cordless and cellular
phone-calls is the fastest-growing area in phreaking today.  This
practice strongly appeals to the lust for power and conveys
gratifying sensations of technical superiority over the
eavesdropping victim.  Monitoring is rife with all manner of
tempting evil mischief.  Simple prurient snooping is by far the
most common activity.  But credit-card numbers unwarily spoken
over the phone can be recorded, stolen and used.  And tapping
people's phone-calls (whether through active telephone taps or
passive radio monitors) does lend itself conveniently to
activities like blackmail, industrial espionage, and political
dirty tricks.

  It should be repeated that telecommunications fraud, the
theft of phone service, causes vastly greater monetary losses
than the practice of entering into computers by stealth.  Hackers
are mostly young suburban American white males, and exist in
their hundreds--but "phreaks" come from both sexes and from many
nationalities, ages and ethnic backgrounds, and are flourishing
in the thousands.




  The term "hacker" has had an unfortunate history.  This
book, THE HACKER CRACKDOWN, has little to say about "hacking" in
its finer, original sense.  The term can signify the free-
wheeling intellectual exploration of the highest and deepest
potential of computer systems.  Hacking can describe the
determination to make access to computers and information as free
and open as possible.  Hacking can involve the heartfelt
conviction that beauty can be found in computers, that the fine
aesthetic in a perfect program can liberate the mind and spirit.
This is "hacking" as it was defined in Steven Levy's much-praised
history of the pioneer computer milieu, HACKERS, published in
1984.

  Hackers of all kinds are absolutely soaked through with
heroic anti-bureaucratic sentiment.  Hackers long for recognition
as a praiseworthy cultural archetype, the postmodern electronic
equivalent of the cowboy and mountain man.  Whether they deserve
such a reputation is something for history to decide.  But many
hackers--including those outlaw hackers who are computer
intruders, and whose activities are defined as criminal--actually
attempt to LIVE UP TO this techno-cowboy reputation.  And given
that electronics and telecommunications are still largely
unexplored territories, there is simply NO TELLING what hackers
might uncover.

  For some people, this freedom is the very breath of
oxygen, the inventive spontaneity that makes life worth living
and that flings open doors to marvellous possibility and
individual empowerment.  But for many people--and increasingly
so--the hacker is an ominous figure, a smart-aleck sociopath
ready to burst out of his basement wilderness and savage other
people's lives for his own anarchical convenience.

  Any form of power without responsibility, without direct
and formal checks and balances, is frightening to people--and
reasonably so.  It should be frankly admitted that hackers ARE
frightening, and that the basis of this fear is not irrational.

  Fear of hackers goes well beyond the fear of merely
criminal activity.

  Subversion and manipulation of the phone system is an act
with disturbing political overtones.  In America, computers and
telephones are potent symbols of organized authority and the
technocratic business elite.

  But there is an element in American culture that has
always strongly rebelled against these symbols; rebelled against
all large industrial computers and all phone companies.  A
certain anarchical tinge deep in the American soul delights in
causing confusion and pain to all bureaucracies, including
technological ones.

  There is sometimes malice and vandalism in this attitude,
but it is a deep and cherished part of the American national
character.  The outlaw, the rebel, the rugged individual, the
pioneer, the sturdy Jeffersonian yeoman, the private citizen
resisting interference in his pursuit of happiness--these are
figures that all Americans recognize, and that many will strongly
applaud and defend.

  Many scrupulously law-abiding citizens today do cutting-
edge work with electronics--work that has already had tremendous
social influence and will have much more in years to come.  In
all truth, these talented, hardworking, law-abiding, mature,
adult people are far more disturbing to the peace and order of
the current status quo than any scofflaw group of romantic
teenage punk kids.  These law-abiding hackers have the power,
ability, and willingness to influence other people's lives quite
unpredictably.  They have means, motive, and opportunity to
meddle drastically with the American social order.  When
corralled into governments, universities, or large multinational
companies, and forced to follow rulebooks and wear suits and
ties, they at least have some conventional halters on their
freedom of action.  But when loosed alone, or in small groups,
and fired by imagination and the entrepreneurial spirit, they can
move mountains--causing landslides that will likely crash
directly into your office and living room.

  These people, as a class, instinctively recognize that a
public, politicized attack on hackers will eventually spread to
them--that the term "hacker," once demonized, might be used to
knock their hands off the levers of power and choke them out of
existence.  There are hackers today who fiercely and publicly
resist any besmirching of the noble title of hacker.  Naturally
and understandably, they deeply resent the attack on their values
implicit in using the word "hacker" as a synonym for computer-
criminal.

  This book, sadly but in my opinion unavoidably, rather
adds to the degradation of the term.  It concerns itself mostly
with "hacking" in its commonest latter-day definition, i.e.,
intruding into computer systems by stealth and without
permission.

  The term "hacking" is used routinely today by almost all
law enforcement officials with any professional interest in
computer fraud and abuse.  American police describe almost any
crime committed with, by, through, or against a computer as
hacking.

  Most importantly, "hacker" is what computer-intruders
choose to call THEMSELVES.  Nobody who "hacks" into systems
willingly describes himself (rarely, herself) as a "computer
intruder," "computer trespasser," "cracker," "wormer," "darkside
hacker" or "high tech street gangster."  Several other demeaning
terms have been invented in the hope that the press and public
will leave the original sense of the word alone.  But few people
actually use these terms.  (I exempt the term "cyberpunk," which
a few hackers and law enforcement people actually do use.  The
term "cyberpunk" is drawn from literary criticism and has some
odd and unlikely resonances, but, like hacker, cyberpunk too has
become a criminal pejorative today.)

  In any case, breaking into computer systems was hardly
alien to the original hacker tradition.  The first tottering
systems of the 1960s required fairly extensive internal surgery
merely to function day-by-day.  Their users "invaded" the
deepest, most arcane recesses of their operating software almost
as a matter of routine.  "Computer security" in these early,
primitive systems was at best an afterthought.  What security
there was, was entirely physical, for it was assumed that anyone
allowed near this expensive, arcane hardware would be a fully
qualified professional expert.

  In a campus environment, though, this meant that grad
students, teaching assistants, undergraduates, and eventually,
all manner of dropouts and hangers-on ended up accessing and
often running the works.

  Universities, even modern universities, are not in the
business of maintaining security over information.  On the
contrary, universities, as institutions, pre-date the
"information economy" by many centuries and are not-for-profit
cultural entities, whose reason for existence (purportedly) is to
discover truth, codify it through techniques of scholarship, and
then teach it.  Universities are meant to PASS THE TORCH OF
CIVILIZATION, not just download data into student skulls, and the
values of the academic community are strongly at odds with those
of all would-be information empires.  Teachers at all levels,
from kindergarten up, have proven to be shameless and persistent
software and data pirates.  Universities do not merely "leak
information" but vigorously broadcast free thought.

  This clash of values has been fraught with controversy.
Many hackers of the 1960s remember their professional
apprenticeship as a long guerilla war against the uptight
mainframe-computer "information priesthood."  These computer-
hungry youngsters had to struggle hard for access to computing
power, and many of them were not above certain, er, shortcuts.
But, over the years, this practice freed computing from the
sterile reserve of lab-coated technocrats and was largely
responsible for the explosive growth of computing in general
society--especially PERSONAL computing.

  Access to technical power acted like catnip on certain of
these youngsters.  Most of the basic techniques of computer
intrusion: password cracking, trapdoors, backdoors, trojan
horses--were invented in college environments in the 1960s, in
the early days of network computing.  Some off-the-cuff
experience at computer intrusion was to be in the informal resume
of most "hackers" and many future industry giants.  Outside of
the tiny cult of computer enthusiasts, few people thought much
about the implications of "breaking into" computers.  This sort
of activity had not yet been publicized, much less criminalized.

  In the 1960s, definitions of "property" and "privacy" had
not yet been extended to cyberspace.  Computers were not yet
indispensable to society.  There were no vast databanks of
vulnerable, proprietary information stored in computers, which
might be accessed, copied without permission, erased, altered, or
sabotaged.  The stakes were low in the early days--but they grew
every year, exponentially, as computers themselves grew.

  By the 1990s, commercial and political pressures had
become overwhelming, and they broke the social boundaries of the
hacking subculture.  Hacking had become too important to be left
to the hackers.  Society was now forced to tackle the intangible
nature of cyberspace-as-property, cyberspace as privately-owned
unreal-estate.  In the new, severe, responsible, high-stakes
context of the "Information Society" of the 1990s, "hacking" was
called into question.

  What did it mean to break into a computer without
permission and use its computational power, or look around inside
its files without hurting anything?  What were computer-intruding
hackers, anyway--how should society, and the law, best define
their actions?  Were they just BROWSERS, harmless intellectual
explorers?  Were they VOYEURS, snoops, invaders of privacy?
Should they be sternly treated as potential AGENTS OF ESPIONAGE,
or perhaps as INDUSTRIAL SPIES?  Or were they best defined as
TRESPASSERS, a very common teenage misdemeanor?  Was hacking
THEFT OF SERVICE?  (After all, intruders were getting someone
else's computer to carry out their orders, without permission and
without paying).  Was hacking FRAUD?  Maybe it was best described
as IMPERSONATION.  The commonest mode of computer intrusion was
(and is) to swipe or snoop somebody else's password, and then
enter the computer in the guise of another person--who is
commonly stuck with the blame and the bills.

  Perhaps a medical metaphor was better--hackers should be
defined as "sick," as COMPUTER ADDICTS unable to control their
irresponsible, compulsive behavior.

  But these weighty assessments meant little to the people
who were actually being judged.  From inside the underground
world of hacking itself, all these perceptions seem quaint,
wrongheaded, stupid, or meaningless.  The most important self-
perception of underground hackers--from the 1960s, right through
to the present day--is that they are an ELITE.  The day-to-day
struggle in the underground is not over sociological
definitions--who cares?--but for power, knowledge, and status
among one's peers.

  When you are a hacker, it is your own inner conviction of
your elite status that enables you to break, or let us say
"transcend," the rules.  It is not that ALL rules go by the
board.  The rules habitually broken by hackers are UNIMPORTANT
rules--the rules of dopey greedhead telco bureaucrats and pig-
ignorant government pests.

  Hackers have their OWN rules, which separate behavior
which is cool and elite, from behavior which is rodentlike,
stupid and losing.  These "rules," however, are mostly unwritten
and enforced by peer pressure and tribal feeling.  Like all
rules that depend on the unspoken conviction that everybody else
is a good old boy, these rules are ripe for abuse.  The
mechanisms of hacker peer-pressure, "teletrials" and ostracism,
are rarely used and rarely work.  Back-stabbing slander, threats,
and electronic harassment are also freely employed in down-and-
dirty intrahacker feuds, but this rarely forces a rival out of
the scene entirely.  The only real solution for the problem of an
utterly losing, treacherous and rodentlike hacker is to TURN HIM
IN TO THE POLICE.  Unlike the Mafia or Medellin Cartel, the
hacker elite cannot simply execute the bigmouths, creeps and
troublemakers among their ranks, so they turn one another in with
astonishing frequency.

  There is no tradition of silence or OMERTA in the hacker
underworld.  Hackers can be shy, even reclusive, but when they do
talk, hackers tend to brag, boast and strut.  Almost everything
hackers do is INVISIBLE; if they don't brag, boast, and strut
about it, then NOBODY WILL EVER KNOW.  If you don't have
something to brag, boast, and strut about, then nobody in the
underground will recognize you and favor you with vital
cooperation and respect.

  The way to win a solid reputation in the underground is
by telling other hackers things that could only have been learned
by exceptional cunning and stealth.  Forbidden knowledge,
therefore, is the basic currency of the digital underground, like
seashells among Trobriand Islanders.  Hackers hoard this
knowledge, and dwell upon it obsessively, and refine it, and
bargain with it, and talk and talk about it.

  Many hackers even suffer from a strange obsession to
TEACH--to spread the ethos and the knowledge of the digital
underground.  They'll do this even when it gains them no
particular advantage and presents a grave personal risk.

  And when that risk catches up with them, they will go
right on teaching and preaching--to a new audience this time,
their interrogators from law enforcement.  Almost every hacker
arrested tells everything he knows--all about his friends, his
mentors, his disciples--legends, threats, horror stories, dire
rumors, gossip, hallucinations.  This is, of course, convenient
for law enforcement--except when law enforcement begins to
believe hacker legendry.

  Phone phreaks are unique among criminals in their
willingness to call up law enforcement officials--in the office,
at their homes--and give them an extended piece of their mind.
It is hard not to interpret this as BEGGING FOR ARREST, and in
fact it is an act of incredible foolhardiness.  Police are
naturally nettled by these acts of chutzpah and will go well out
of their way to bust these flaunting idiots.  But it can also be
interpreted as a product of a world-view so elitist, so closed
and hermetic, that electronic police are simply not perceived as
"police," but rather as ENEMY PHONE PHREAKS who should be scolded
into behaving "decently."

  Hackers at their most grandiloquent perceive themselves
as the elite pioneers of a new electronic world.  Attempts to
make them obey the democratically established laws of
contemporary American society are seen as repression and
persecution.  After all, they argue, if Alexander Graham Bell had
gone along with the rules of the Western Union telegraph company,
there would have been no telephones.  If Jobs and Wozniak had
believed that IBM was the be-all and end-all, there would have
been no personal computers.  If Benjamin Franklin and Thomas
Jefferson had tried to "work within the system" there would have
been no United States.

  Not only do hackers privately believe this as an article
of faith, but they have been known to write ardent manifestos
about it.  Here are some revealing excerpts from an especially
vivid hacker manifesto:  "The Techno-Revolution" by "Dr. Crash,"
which appeared in electronic form in PHRACK Volume 1, Issue 6,
Phile 3.



  "To fully explain the true motives behind hacking, we
must first take a quick look into the past.  In the 1960s, a
group of MIT students built the first modern computer system.
This wild, rebellious group of young men were the first to bear
the name 'hackers.'  The systems that they developed were
intended to be used to solve world problems and to benefit all of
mankind.

  "As we can see, this has not been the case.  The computer
system has been solely in the hands of big businesses and the
government.  The wonderful device meant to enrich life has become
a weapon which dehumanizes people.  To the government and large
businesses, people are no more than disk space, and the
government doesn't use computers to arrange aid for the poor, but
to control nuclear death weapons.  The average American can only
have access to a small microcomputer which is worth only a
fraction of what they pay for it.  The businesses keep the true
state-of-the-art equipment away from the people behind a steel
wall of incredibly high prices and bureaucracy.  It is because of
this state of affairs that hacking was born.(...)

  "Of course, the government doesn't want the monopoly of
technology broken, so they have outlawed hacking and arrest
anyone who is caught.(...) The phone company is another example
of technology abused and kept from people with high prices.(...)

  "Hackers often find that their existing equipment, due to
the monopoly tactics of computer companies, is inefficient for
their purposes.  Due to the exorbitantly high prices, it is
impossible to legally purchase the necessary equipment.  This
need has given still another segment of the fight:  Credit
Carding.  Carding is a way of obtaining the necessary goods
without paying for them.  It is again due to the companies'
stupidity that Carding is so easy, and shows that the world's
businesses are in the hands of those with considerably less
technical know-how than we, the hackers. (...)

  "Hacking must continue.  We must train newcomers to the
art of hacking.(...)  And whatever you do, continue the fight.
Whether you know it or not, if you are a hacker, you are a
revolutionary.  Don't worry, you're on the right side."



  The defense of "carding" is rare.  Most hackers regard
credit-card theft as "poison" to the underground, a sleazy and
immoral effort that, worse yet, is hard to get away with.
Nevertheless, manifestos advocating credit-card theft, the
deliberate crashing of computer systems, and even acts of violent
physical destruction such as vandalism and arson do exist in the
underground.  These boasts and threats are taken quite seriously
by the police.  And not every hacker is an abstract, Platonic
computer-nerd.  Some few are quite experienced at picking locks,
robbing phone-trucks, and breaking and entering buildings.

  Hackers vary in their degree of hatred for authority and
the violence of their rhetoric.  But, at a bottom line, they are
scofflaws.  They don't regard the current rules of electronic
behavior as respectable efforts to preserve law and order and
protect public safety.  They regard these laws as immoral efforts
by soulless corporations to protect their profit margins and to
crush dissidents.  "Stupid" people, including police,
businessmen, politicians, and journalists, simply have no right
to judge the actions of those possessed of genius, techno-
revolutionary intentions, and technical expertise.




  Hackers are generally teenagers and college kids not
engaged in earning a living.  They often come from fairly well-
to-do middle-class backgrounds, and are markedly anti-
materialistic (except, that is, when it comes to computer
equipment).  Anyone motivated by greed for mere money (as opposed
to the greed for power, knowledge and status) is swiftly written-
off as a narrow-minded breadhead whose interests can only be
corrupt and contemptible.  Having grown up in the 1970s and
1980s, the young Bohemians of the digital underground regard
straight society as awash in plutocratic corruption, where
everyone from the President down is for sale and whoever has the
gold makes the rules.

  Interestingly, there's a funhouse-mirror image of this
attitude on the other side of the conflict.  The police are also
one of the most markedly anti-materialistic groups in American
society, motivated not by mere money but by ideals of service,
justice, esprit-de-corps, and, of course, their own brand of
specialized knowledge and power.  Remarkably, the propaganda war
between cops and hackers has always involved angry allegations
that the other side is trying to make a sleazy buck.  Hackers
consistently sneer that anti-phreak prosecutors are angling for
cushy jobs as telco lawyers and that computer-crime police are
aiming to cash in later as well-paid computer-security
consultants in the private sector.

  For their part, police publicly conflate all hacking
crimes with robbing payphones with crowbars.  Allegations of
"monetary losses" from computer intrusion are notoriously
inflated.  The act of illicitly copying a document from a
computer is morally equated with directly robbing a company of,
say, half a million dollars.  The teenage computer intruder in
possession of this "proprietary" document has certainly not sold
it for such a sum, would likely have little idea how to sell it
at all, and quite probably doesn't even understand what he has.
He has not made a cent in profit from his felony but is still
morally equated with a thief who has robbed the church poorbox
and lit out for Brazil.

  Police want to believe that all hackers are thieves.  It
is a tortuous and almost unbearable act for the American justice
system to put people in jail because they want to learn things
which are forbidden for them to know.  In an American context,
almost any pretext for punishment is better than jailing people
to protect certain restricted kinds of information.
Nevertheless, POLICING INFORMATION is part and parcel of the
struggle against hackers.

  This dilemma is well exemplified by the remarkable
activities of "Emmanuel Goldstein," editor and publisher of a
print magazine known as 2600: THE HACKER QUARTERLY.  Goldstein
was an English major at Long Island's State University of New
York in the '70s, when he became involved with the local college
radio station.  His growing interest in electronics caused him to
drift into Yippie _TAP_ circles and thus into the digital
underground, where he became a self-described techno-rat.  His
magazine publishes techniques of computer intrusion and telephone
"exploration" as well as gloating exposes of telco misdeeds and
governmental failings.

  Goldstein lives quietly and very privately in a large,
crumbling Victorian mansion in Setauket, New York.  The seaside
house is decorated with telco decals, chunks of driftwood, and
the basic bric-a-brac of a hippie crash-pad.  He is unmarried,
mildly unkempt, and survives mostly on TV dinners and turkey-
stuffing eaten straight out of the bag.  Goldstein is a man of
considerable charm and fluency, with a brief, disarming smile and
the kind of pitiless, stubborn, thoroughly recidivist integrity
that America's electronic police find genuinely alarming.

  Goldstein took his nom-de-plume, or "handle," from a
character in Orwell's _1984_, which may be taken, correctly, as a
symptom of the gravity of his sociopolitical worldview.  He is
not himself a practicing computer intruder, though he vigorously
abets these actions, especially when they are pursued against
large corporations or governmental agencies.  Nor is he a thief,
for he loudly scorns mere theft of phone service, in favor of
'exploring and manipulating the system.'  He is probably best
described and understood as a DISSIDENT.

  Weirdly, Goldstein is living in modern America under
conditions very similar to those of former East European
intellectual dissidents.  In other words, he flagrantly espouses
a value-system that is deeply and irrevocably opposed to the
system of those in power and the police.  The values in _2600_
are generally expressed in terms that are ironic, sarcastic,
paradoxical, or just downright confused.  But there's no
mistaking their radically anti-authoritarian tenor.  _2600_ holds
that technical power and specialized knowledge, of any kind
obtainable, belong by right in the hands of those individuals
brave and bold enough to discover them--by whatever means
necessary.  Devices, laws, or systems that forbid access, and the
free spread of knowledge, are provocations that any free and
self-respecting hacker should relentlessly attack.  The "privacy"
of governments, corporations and other soulless technocratic
organizations should never be protected at the expense of the
liberty and free initiative of the individual techno-rat.

  However, in our contemporary workaday world, both
governments and corporations are very anxious indeed to police
information which is secret, proprietary, restricted,
confidential, copyrighted, patented, hazardous, illegal,
unethical, embarrassing, or otherwise sensitive.  This makes
Goldstein persona non grata, and his philosophy a threat.

  Very little about the conditions of Goldstein's daily
life would astonish, say, Vaclav Havel.  (We may note in passing
that President Havel once had his word-processor confiscated by
the Czechoslovak police.)  Goldstein lives by SAMIZDAT, acting
semi-openly as a data-center for the underground, while
challenging the powers-that-be to abide by their own stated
rules:  freedom of speech and the First Amendment.

  Goldstein thoroughly looks and acts the part of techno-
rat, with shoulder-length ringlets and a piratical black
fisherman's-cap set at a rakish angle.  He often shows up like
Banquo's ghost at meetings of computer professionals, where he
listens quietly, half-smiling and taking thorough notes.

  Computer professionals generally meet publicly, and find
it very difficult to rid themselves of Goldstein and his ilk
without extralegal and unconstitutional actions.  Sympathizers,
many of them quite respectable people with responsible jobs,
admire Goldstein's attitude and surreptitiously pass him
information.  An unknown but presumably large proportion of
Goldstein's 2,000-plus readership are telco security personnel
and police, who are forced to subscribe to _2600_ to stay
abreast of new developments in hacking.  They thus find
themselves PAYING THIS GUY'S RENT while grinding their teeth in
anguish, a situation that would have delighted Abbie Hoffman (one
of Goldstein's few idols).

  Goldstein is probably the best-known public
representative of the hacker underground today, and certainly the
best-hated.  Police regard him as a Fagin, a corrupter of youth,
and speak of him with untempered loathing.  He is quite an
accomplished gadfly.

  After the Martin Luther King Day Crash of 1990,
Goldstein, for instance, adeptly rubbed salt into the wound in
the pages of _2600_.  "Yeah, it was fun for the phone phreaks as
we watched the network crumble," he admitted cheerfully.  "But it
was also an ominous sign of what's to come...  Some AT&T people,
aided by well-meaning but ignorant media, were spreading the
notion that many companies had the same software and therefore
could face the same problem someday.  Wrong.  This was entirely
an AT&T software deficiency.  Of course, other companies could
face entirely DIFFERENT software problems.  But then, so too
could AT&T."

  After a technical discussion of the system's failings,
the Long Island techno-rat went on to offer thoughtful criticism
to the gigantic multinational's hundreds of professionally
qualified engineers.  "What we don't know is how a major force in
communications like AT&T could be so sloppy.  What happened to
backups?  Sure, computer systems go down all the time, but people
making phone calls are not the same as people logging on to
computers.  We must make that distinction.  It's not acceptable
for the phone system or any other essential service to 'go down.'
If we continue to trust technology without understanding it, we
can look forward to many variations on this theme.

  "AT&T owes it to its customers to be prepared to
INSTANTLY switch to another network if something strange and
unpredictable starts occurring.  The news here isn't so much the
failure of a computer program, but the failure of AT&T's entire
structure."

  The very idea of this.... this PERSON.... offering
"advice" about "AT&T's entire structure" is more than some people
can easily bear.  How dare this near-criminal dictate what is or
isn't "acceptable" behavior from AT&T?  Especially when he's
publishing, in the very same issue, detailed schematic diagrams
for creating various switching-network signalling tones
unavailable to the public.

  "See what happens when you drop a 'silver box' tone or
two down your local exchange or through different long distance
service carriers," advises _2600_ contributor "Mr. Upsetter" in
"How To Build a Signal Box."  "If you experiment systematically
and keep good records, you will surely discover something
interesting."

  This is, of course, the scientific method, generally
regarded as a praiseworthy activity and one of the flowers of
modern civilization.  One can indeed learn a great deal with this
sort of structured intellectual activity.  Telco employees regard
this mode of "exploration" as akin to flinging sticks of dynamite
into their pond to see what lives on the bottom.

  _2600_ has been published consistently since 1984.  It
has also run a bulletin board computer system, printed _2600_ T-
shirts, taken fax calls...  The Spring 1991 issue has an
interesting announcement on page 45:  "We just discovered an
extra set of wires attached to our fax line and heading up the
pole.  (They've since been clipped.)  Your faxes to us and to
anyone else could be monitored."

  In the worldview of _2600_, the tiny band of techno-rat
brothers (rarely, sisters) are a beseiged vanguard of the truly
free and honest.  The rest of the world is a maelstrom of
corporate crime and high-level governmental corruption,
occasionally tempered with well-meaning ignorance.  To read a few
issues in a row is to enter a nightmare akin to Solzhenitsyn's,
somewhat tempered by the fact that _2600_ is often extremely
funny.

  Goldstein did not become a target of the Hacker
Crackdown, though he protested loudly, eloquently, and publicly
about it, and it added considerably to his fame.  It was not that
he is not regarded as dangerous, because he is so regarded.
Goldstein has had brushes with the law in the past:  in 1985, a
_2600_ bulletin board computer was seized by the FBI, and some
software on it was formally declared "a burglary tool in the form
of a computer program."  But Goldstein escaped direct repression
in 1990, because his magazine is printed on paper, and recognized
as subject to Constitutional freedom of the press protection.  As
was seen in the RAMPARTS case, this is far from an absolute
guarantee.  Still, as a practical matter, shutting down _2600_ by
court-order would create so much legal hassle that it is simply
unfeasible, at least for the present.  Throughout 1990, both
Goldstein and his magazine were peevishly thriving.

  Instead, the Crackdown of 1990 would concern itself with
the computerized version of forbidden data.  The crackdown
itself, first and foremost, was about BULLETIN BOARD SYSTEMS.
Bulletin Board Systems, most often known by the ugly and un-
pluralizable acronym "BBS," are the life-blood of the digital
underground.  Boards were also central to law enforcement's
tactics and strategy in the Hacker Crackdown.

  A "bulletin board system" can be formally defined as a
computer which serves as an information and message-passing
center for users dialing-up over the phone-lines through the use
of modems.  A "modem," or modulator-demodulator, is a device
which translates the digital impulses of computers into audible
analog telephone signals, and vice versa.  Modems connect
computers to phones and thus to each other.

  Large-scale mainframe computers have been connected since
the 1960s, but PERSONAL computers, run by individuals out of
their homes, were first networked in the late 1970s.  The "board"
created by Ward Christensen and Randy Suess in February 1978, in
Chicago, Illinois, is generally regarded as the first personal-
computer bulletin board system worthy of the name.

  Boards run on many different machines, employing many
different kinds of software.  Early boards were crude and buggy,
and their managers, known as "system operators" or "sysops," were
hard-working technical experts who wrote their own software.  But
like most everything else in the world of electronics, boards
became faster, cheaper, better-designed, and generally far more
sophisticated throughout the 1980s.  They also moved swiftly out
of the hands of pioneers and into those of the general public.
By 1985 there were something in the neighborhood of 4,000 boards
in America.  By 1990 it was calculated, vaguely, that there were
about 30,000 boards in the US, with uncounted thousands overseas.

  Computer bulletin boards are unregulated enterprises.
Running a board is a rough-and-ready, catch-as-catch-can
proposition.  Basically, anybody with a computer, modem, software
and a phone-line can start a board.  With second-hand equipment
and public-domain free software, the price of a board might be
quite small--less than it would take to publish a magazine or
even a decent pamphlet.  Entrepreneurs eagerly sell bulletin-
board software, and will coach nontechnical amateur sysops in its
use.

  Boards are not "presses."  They are not magazines, or
libraries, or phones, or CB radios, or traditional cork bulletin
boards down at the local laundry, though they have some passing
resemblance to those earlier media.  Boards are a new medium--
they may even be a LARGE NUMBER of new media.

  Consider these unique characteristics:  boards are cheap,
yet they can have a national, even global reach.  Boards can be
contacted from anywhere in the global telephone network, at NO
COST to the person running the board--the caller pays the phone
bill, and if the caller is local, the call is free.  Boards do
not involve an editorial elite addressing a mass audience.  The
"sysop" of a board is not an exclusive publisher or writer--he is
managing an electronic salon, where individuals can address the
general public, play the part of the general public, and also
exchange private mail with other individuals.  And the
"conversation" on boards, though fluid, rapid, and highly
interactive, is not spoken, but written.  It is also relatively
anonymous, sometimes completely so.

  And because boards are cheap and ubiquitous, regulations
and licensing requirements would likely be practically
unenforceable.  It would almost be easier to "regulate",
"inspect" and "license" the content of private mail--probably
more so, since the mail system is operated by the federal
government.  Boards are run by individuals, independently,
entirely at their own whim.

  For the sysop, the cost of operation is not the primary
limiting factor.  Once the investment in a computer and modem has
been made, the only steady cost is the charge for maintaining a
phone line (or several phone lines).  The primary limits for
sysops are time and energy.  Boards require upkeep.  New users
are generally "validated"--they must be issued individual
passwords, and called at home by voice-phone, so that their
identity can be verified.  Obnoxious users, who exist in plenty,
must be chided or purged.  Proliferating messages must be deleted
when they grow old, so that the capacity of the system is not
overwhelmed.  And software programs (if such things are kept on
the board) must be examined for possible computer viruses.  If
there is a financial charge to use the board (increasingly
common, especially in larger and fancier systems) then accounts
must be kept, and users must be billed.  And if the board
crashes--a very common occurrence--then repairs must be made.

  Boards can be distinguished by the amount of effort spent
in regulating them.  First, we have the completely open board,
whose sysop is off chugging brews and watching re-runs while his
users generally degenerate over time into peevish anarchy and
eventual silence.  Second comes the supervised board, where the
sysop breaks in every once in a while to tidy up, calm brawls,
issue announcements, and rid the community of dolts and
troublemakers.  Third is the heavily supervised board, which
sternly urges adult and responsible behavior and swiftly edits
any message considered offensive, impertinent, illegal or
irrelevant.  And last comes the completely edited "electronic
publication," which is presented to a silent audience which is
not allowed to respond directly in any way.

  Boards can also be grouped by their degree of anonymity.
There is the completely anonymous board, where everyone uses
pseudonyms--"handles"--and even the sysop is unaware of the
user's true identity.  The sysop himself is likely pseudonymous
on a board of this type.  Second, and rather more common, is the
board where the sysop knows (or thinks he knows) the true names
and addresses of all users, but the users don't know one
another's names and may not know his.  Third is the board where
everyone has to use real names, and roleplaying and pseudonymous
posturing are forbidden.

  Boards can be grouped by their immediacy.  "Chat-lines"
are boards linking several users together over several different
phone-lines simultaneously, so that people exchange messages at
the very moment that they type.  (Many large boards feature
"chat" capabilities along with other services.)  Less immediate
boards, perhaps with a single phoneline, store messages serially,
one at a time.  And some boards are only open for business in
daylight hours or on weekends, which greatly slows response.  A
NETWORK of boards, such as "FidoNet," can carry electronic mail
from board to board, continent to continent, across huge
distances--but at a relative snail's pace, so that a message can
take several days to reach its target audience and elicit a
reply.

  Boards can be grouped by their degree of community.  Some
boards emphasize the exchange of private, person-to-person
electronic mail.  Others emphasize public postings and may even
purge people who "lurk," merely reading posts but refusing to
openly participate.  Some boards are intimate and neighborly.
Others are frosty and highly technical.  Some are little more
than storage dumps for software, where users "download" and
"upload" programs, but interact among themselves little if at
all.

  Boards can be grouped by their ease of access.  Some
boards are entirely public.  Others are private and restricted
only to personal friends of the sysop.  Some boards divide users
by status.  On these boards, some users, especially beginners,
strangers or children, will be restricted to general topics, and
perhaps forbidden to post.  Favored users, though, are granted
the ability to post as they please, and to stay "on-line" as long
as they like, even to the disadvantage of other people trying to
call in.  High-status users can be given access to hidden areas
in the board, such as off-color topics, private discussions,
and/or valuable software.  Favored users may even become "remote
sysops" with the power to take remote control of the board
through their own home computers.  Quite often "remote sysops"
end up doing all the work and taking formal control of the
enterprise, despite the fact that it's physically located in
someone else's house.  Sometimes several "co-sysops" share power.

  And boards can also be grouped by size.  Massive,
nationwide commercial networks, such as CompuServe, Delphi, GEnie
and Prodigy, are run on mainframe computers and are generally not
considered "boards," though they share many of their
characteristics, such as electronic mail, discussion topics,
libraries of software, and persistent and growing problems with
civil-liberties issues.  Some private boards have as many as
thirty phone-lines and quite sophisticated hardware.  And then
there are tiny boards.

  Boards vary in popularity.  Some boards are huge and
crowded, where users must claw their way in against a constant
busy-signal.  Others are huge and empty--there are few things
sadder than a formerly flourishing board where no one posts any
longer, and the dead conversations of vanished users lie about
gathering digital dust.  Some boards are tiny and intimate, their
telephone numbers intentionally kept confidential so that only a
small number can log on.

  And some boards are UNDERGROUND.

  Boards can be mysterious entities.  The activities of
their users can be hard to differentiate from conspiracy.
Sometimes they ARE conspiracies.  Boards have harbored, or have
been accused of harboring, all manner of fringe groups, and have
abetted, or been accused of abetting, every manner of frowned-
upon, sleazy, radical, and criminal activity.  There are Satanist
boards.  Nazi boards.  Pornographic boards.  Pedophile boards.
Drug-dealing boards.  Anarchist boards.  Communist boards.  Gay
and Lesbian boards (these exist in great profusion, many of them
quite lively with well-established histories).  Religious cult
boards.  Evangelical boards.  Witchcraft boards, hippie boards,
punk boards, skateboarder boards.  Boards for UFO believers.
There may well be boards for serial killers, airline terrorists
and professional assassins.  There is simply no way to tell.
Boards spring up, flourish, and disappear in large numbers, in
most every corner of the developed world.  Even apparently
innocuous public boards can, and sometimes do, harbor secret
areas known only to a few.  And even on the vast, public,
commercial services, private mail is very private--and quite
possibly criminal.

  Boards cover most every topic imaginable and some that
are hard to imagine.  They cover a vast spectrum of social
activity.  However, all board users do have something in common:
their possession of computers and phones.  Naturally, computers
and phones are primary topics of conversation on almost every
board.

  And hackers and phone phreaks, those utter devotees of
computers and phones, live by boards.  They swarm by boards.
They are bred by boards.  By the late 1980s, phone-phreak groups
and hacker groups, united by boards, had proliferated
fantastically.

  As evidence, here is a list of hacker groups compiled by
the editors of PHRACK on August 8, 1988.

  The Administration.  Advanced Telecommunications, Inc.
ALIAS.  American Tone Travelers.  Anarchy Inc.  Apple Mafia.  The
Association. Atlantic Pirates Guild.

  Bad Ass Mother Fuckers.  Bellcore.  Bell Shock Force.
Black Bag.

  Camorra.  C&M Productions.  Catholics Anonymous.  Chaos
Computer Club.  Chief Executive Officers.  Circle Of Death.
Circle Of Deneb.  Club X.  Coalition of Hi-Tech Pirates.  Coast-
To-Coast.  Corrupt Computing.  Cult Of The Dead Cow.  Custom
Retaliations.

  Damage Inc.  D&B Communications. The Dange Gang.  Dec
Hunters.  Digital Gang.  DPAK.

  Eastern Alliance. The Elite Hackers Guild.  Elite
Phreakers and Hackers Club.  The Elite Society Of America.  EPG.
Executives Of Crime. Extasyy Elite.

  Fargo 4A.  Farmers Of Doom.  The Federation.  Feds R Us.
First Class.  Five O.  Five Star.  Force Hackers.  The 414s.

  Hack-A-Trip.  Hackers Of America.  High Mountain Hackers.
High Society.  The Hitchhikers.

  IBM Syndicate.  The Ice Pirates.  Imperial Warlords.
Inner Circle. Inner Circle II.  Insanity Inc.  International
Computer Underground Bandits.

  Justice League of America.

  Kaos Inc.  Knights Of Shadow.  Knights Of The Round
Table.

  League Of Adepts.  Legion Of Doom.  Legion Of Hackers.
Lords Of Chaos.  Lunatic Labs, Unlimited.

  Master Hackers.  MAD!  The Marauders.  MD/PhD.  Metal
Communications, Inc.  MetalliBashers, Inc.  MBI.  Metro
Communications.  Midwest Pirates Guild.

  NASA Elite.  The NATO Association.  Neon Knights.
Nihilist Order.

  Order Of The Rose.  OSS.

  Pacific Pirates Guild.  Phantom Access Associates.  PHido
PHreaks. The Phirm.  Phlash.  PhoneLine Phantoms.  Phone
Phreakers Of America. Phortune 500.  Phreak Hack Delinquents.
Phreak Hack Destroyers.  Phreakers, Hackers, And Laundromat
Employees Gang (PHALSE Gang).  Phreaks Against Geeks.  Phreaks
Against Phreaks Against Geeks.  Phreaks and Hackers of America.
Phreaks Anonymous World Wide.  Project Genesis.  The Punk Mafia.

  The Racketeers.  Red Dawn Text Files.  Roscoe Gang.

  SABRE.  Secret Circle of Pirates.  Secret Service.  707
Club.  Shadow Brotherhood.  Sharp Inc.  65C02 Elite.  Spectral
Force. Star League.  Stowaways.  Strata-Crackers.

  Team Hackers '86.  Team Hackers '87.  TeleComputist
Newsletter Staff.  Tribunal Of Knowledge.  Triple Entente.  Turn
Over And Die Syndrome (TOADS).  300 Club.  1200 Club.  2300 Club.
2600 Club.  2601 Club.  2AF.

  The United Soft WareZ Force.  United Technical
Underground.

  Ware Brigade.  The Warelords.  WASP.

  Contemplating this list is  an impressive, almost
humbling business. As a cultural artifact, the thing approaches
poetry.

  Underground groups--subcultures--can be distinguished
from independent cultures by their habit of referring constantly
to the parent society.  Undergrounds by their nature constantly
must maintain a membrane of differentiation.  Funny/distinctive
clothes and hair, specialized jargon, specialized ghettoized
areas in cities, different hours of rising, working, sleeping....
The digital underground, which specializes in information, relies
very heavily on language to distinguish itself.  As can be seen
from this list, they make heavy use of parody and mockery.  It's
revealing to see who they choose to mock.

  First, large corporations.  We have the Phortune 500, The
Chief Executive Officers, Bellcore, IBM Syndicate, SABRE (a
computerized reservation service maintained by airlines).  The
common use of "Inc." is telling--none of these groups are actual
corporations, but take clear delight in mimicking them.

  Second, governments and police.  NASA Elite, NATO
Association.  "Feds R Us" and "Secret Service" are fine bits of
fleering boldness.  OSS--the Office of Strategic Services was the
forerunner of the CIA.

  Third, criminals.  Using stigmatizing pejoratives as a
perverse badge of honor is a time-honored tactic for subcultures:
punks, gangs, delinquents, mafias, pirates, bandits, racketeers.

  Specialized orthography, especially the use of "ph" for
"f" and "z" for the plural "s," are instant recognition symbols.
So is the use of the numeral "0" for the letter "O"--computer-
software orthography generally features a slash through the zero,
making the distinction obvious.

  Some terms are poetically descriptive of computer
intrusion:  the Stowaways, the Hitchhikers, the PhoneLine
Phantoms, Coast-to-Coast.  Others are simple bravado and
vainglorious puffery.  (Note the insistent use of the terms
"elite" and "master.")  Some terms are blasphemous, some obscene,
others merely cryptic--anything to puzzle, offend, confuse, and
keep the straights at bay.

  Many hacker groups further re-encrypt their names by the
use of acronyms:  United Technical Underground becomes UTU,
Farmers of Doom become FoD, the United SoftWareZ Force becomes,
at its own insistence, "TuSwF," and woe to the ignorant rodent
who capitalizes the wrong letters.

  It should be further recognized that the members of these
groups are themselves pseudonymous.  If you did, in fact, run
across the "PhoneLine Phantoms," you would find them to consist
of "Carrier Culprit," "The Executioner," "Black Majik," "Egyptian
Lover," "Solid State," and "Mr Icom."  "Carrier Culprit" will
likely be referred to by his friends as "CC," as in, "I got these
dialups from CC of PLP."

  It's quite possible that this entire list refers to as
few as a thousand people.  It is not a complete list of
underground groups--there has never been such a list, and there
never will be.  Groups rise, flourish, decline, share membership,
maintain a cloud of wannabes and casual hangers-on.  People pass
in and out, are ostracized, get bored, are busted by police, or
are cornered by telco security and presented with huge bills.
Many "underground groups" are software pirates, "warez d00dz,"
who might break copy protection and pirate programs, but likely
wouldn't dare to intrude on a computer-system.

  It is hard to estimate the true population of the digital
underground.  There is constant turnover.  Most hackers start
young, come and go, then drop out at age 22--the age of college
graduation.  And a large majority of "hackers" access pirate
boards, adopt a handle, swipe software and perhaps abuse a phone-
code or two, while never actually joining the elite.

  Some professional informants, who make it their business
to retail knowledge of the underground to paymasters in private
corporate security, have estimated the hacker population at as
high as fifty thousand.  This is likely highly inflated, unless
one counts every single teenage software pirate and petty phone-
booth thief.  My best guess is about 5,000 people.  Of these, I
would guess that as few as a hundred are truly "elite"--active
computer intruders, skilled enough to penetrate sophisticated
systems and truly to worry corporate security and law
enforcement.

  Another interesting speculation is whether this group is
growing or not.  Young teenage hackers are often convinced that
hackers exist in vast swarms and will soon dominate the
cybernetic universe.  Older and wiser veterans, perhaps as
wizened as 24 or 25 years old, are convinced that the glory days
are long gone, that the cops have the underground's number now,
and that kids these days are dirt-stupid and just want to play
Nintendo.

  My own assessment is that computer intrusion, as a non-
profit act of intellectual exploration and mastery, is in slow
decline, at least in the United States; but that electronic
fraud, especially telecommunication crime, is growing by leaps
and bounds.

  One might find a useful parallel to the digital
underground in the drug underground.  There was a time, now much-
obscured by historical revisionism, when Bohemians freely shared
joints at concerts, and hip, small-scale marijuana dealers might
turn people on just for the sake of enjoying a long stoned
conversation about the Doors and Allen Ginsberg.  Now drugs are
increasingly verboten, except in a high-stakes, highly-criminal
world of highly addictive drugs.  Over years of disenchantment
and police harassment, a vaguely ideological, free-wheeling drug
underground has relinquished the business of drug-dealing to a
far more savage criminal hard-core.  This is not a pleasant
prospect to contemplate, but the analogy is fairly compelling.

  What does an underground board look like?  What
distinguishes it from a standard board?  It isn't necessarily the
conversation--hackers often talk about common board topics, such
as hardware, software, sex, science fiction, current events,
politics, movies, personal gossip.  Underground boards can best
be distinguished by their files, or "philes," pre-composed texts
which teach the techniques and ethos of the underground.  These
are prized reservoirs of forbidden knowledge.  Some are
anonymous, but most proudly bear the handle of the "hacker" who
has created them, and his group affiliation, if he has one.

  Here is a partial table-of-contents of philes from an
underground board, somewhere in the heart of middle America,
circa 1991.  The descriptions are mostly self-explanatory.



BANKAMER.ZIP   5406 06-11-91  Hacking Bank America
CHHACK.ZIP     4481 06-11-91  Chilton Hacking
CITIBANK.ZIP   4118 06-11-91  Hacking Citibank
CREDIMTC.ZIP   3241 06-11-91  Hacking Mtc Credit Company
DIGEST.ZIP     5159 06-11-91  Hackers Digest
HACK.ZIP  14031 06-11-91  How To Hack
HACKBAS.ZIP    5073 06-11-91  Basics Of Hacking
HACKDICT.ZIP  42774 06-11-91  Hackers Dictionary
HACKER.ZIP    57938 06-11-91  Hacker Info
HACKERME.ZIP   3148 06-11-91  Hackers Manual
HACKHAND.ZIP   4814 06-11-91  Hackers Handbook
HACKTHES.ZIP  48290 06-11-91  Hackers Thesis
HACKVMS.ZIP    4696 06-11-91  Hacking Vms Systems
MCDON.ZIP  3830 06-11-91  Hacking Macdonalds (Home Of The Archs)
P500UNIX.ZIP  15525 06-11-91  Phortune 500 Guide To Unix
RADHACK.ZIP    8411 06-11-91  Radio Hacking
TAOTRASH.DOC   4096 12-25-89  Suggestions For Trashing
TECHHACK.ZIP   5063 06-11-91  Technical Hacking

The files above are do-it-yourself manuals about computer
intrusion.  The above is only a small section of a much larger
library of hacking and phreaking techniques and history.  We now
move into a different and perhaps surprising area.


                         +------------+
                         |   Anarchy  |
                         +------------+


ANARC.ZIP  3641 06-11-91  Anarchy Files
ANARCHST.ZIP  63703 06-11-91  Anarchist Book
ANARCHY.ZIP    2076 06-11-91  Anarchy At Home
ANARCHY3.ZIP   6982 06-11-91  Anarchy No 3
ANARCTOY.ZIP   2361 06-11-91  Anarchy Toys
ANTIMODM.ZIP   2877 06-11-91  Anti-modem Weapons
ATOM.ZIP   4494 06-11-91  How To Make An Atom Bomb
BARBITUA.ZIP   3982 06-11-91  Barbiturate Formula
BLCKPWDR.ZIP   2810 06-11-91  Black Powder Formulas
BOMB.ZIP   3765 06-11-91  How To Make Bombs
BOOM.ZIP   2036 06-11-91  Things That Go Boom
CHLORINE.ZIP   1926 06-11-91  Chlorine Bomb
COOKBOOK.ZIP   1500 06-11-91  Anarchy Cook Book
DESTROY.ZIP    3947 06-11-91  Destroy Stuff
DUSTBOMB.ZIP   2576 06-11-91  Dust Bomb
ELECTERR.ZIP   3230 06-11-91  Electronic Terror
EXPLOS1.ZIP    2598 06-11-91  Explosives 1
EXPLOSIV.ZIP  18051 06-11-91  More Explosives
EZSTEAL.ZIP    4521 06-11-91  Ez-stealing
FLAME.ZIP  2240 06-11-91  Flame Thrower
FLASHLT.ZIP    2533 06-11-91  Flashlight Bomb
FMBUG.ZIP  2906 06-11-91  How To Make An Fm Bug
OMEEXPL.ZIP    2139 06-11-91  Home Explosives
HOW2BRK.ZIP    3332 06-11-91  How To Break In
LETTER.ZIP     2990 06-11-91  Letter Bomb
LOCK.ZIP   2199 06-11-91  How To Pick Locks
MRSHIN.ZIP     3991 06-11-91  Briefcase Locks
NAPALM.ZIP     3563 06-11-91  Napalm At Home
NITRO.ZIP  3158 06-11-91  Fun With Nitro
PARAMIL.ZIP    2962 06-11-91  Paramilitary Info
PICKING.ZIP    3398 06-11-91  Picking Locks
PIPEBOMB.ZIP   2137 06-11-91  Pipe Bomb
POTASS.ZIP     3987 06-11-91  Formulas With Potassium
PRANK.TXT 11074 08-03-90  More Pranks To Pull On Idiots!
REVENGE.ZIP    4447 06-11-91  Revenge Tactics
ROCKET.ZIP     2590 06-11-91  Rockets For Fun
SMUGGLE.ZIP    3385 06-11-91  How To Smuggle


  HOLY COW!  The damned thing is full of stuff about bombs!

  What are we to make of this?

  First, it should be acknowledged that spreading knowledge
about demolitions to teenagers is a highly and deliberately
antisocial act.  It is not, however, illegal.

  Second, it should be recognized that most of these philes
were in fact WRITTEN by teenagers.  Most adult American males who
can remember their teenage years will recognize that the notion
of building a flamethrower in your garage is an incredibly neat-o
idea.  ACTUALLY building a flamethrower in your garage, however,
is fraught with discouraging difficulty.  Stuffing gunpowder into
a booby-trapped flashlight, so as to blow the arm off your high-
school vice-principal, can be a thing of dark beauty to
contemplate.  Actually committing assault by explosives will
earn you the sustained attention of the federal Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.

  Some people, however, will actually try these plans.  A
determinedly murderous American teenager can probably buy or
steal a handgun far more easily than he can brew fake "napalm" in
the kitchen sink.  Nevertheless, if temptation is spread before
people a certain number will succumb, and a small minority will
actually attempt these stunts.  A large minority of that small
minority will either fail or, quite likely, maim themselves,
since these "philes" have not been checked for accuracy, are not
the product of professional experience, and are often highly
fanciful.  But the gloating menace of these philes is not to be
entirely dismissed.

  Hackers may not be "serious" about bombing; if they were,
we would hear far more about exploding flashlights, homemade
bazookas, and gym teachers poisoned by chlorine and potassium.
However, hackers are VERY serious about forbidden knowledge.
They are possessed not merely by curiosity, but by a positive
LUST TO KNOW.  The desire to know what others don't is scarcely
new.  But the INTENSITY of this desire, as manifested by these
young technophilic denizens of the Information Age, may in fact
BE new, and may represent some basic shift in social values--a
harbinger of what the world may come to, as society lays more and
more value on the possession, assimilation and retailing of
INFORMATION as a basic commodity of daily life.

  There have always been young men with obsessive interests
in these topics.  Never before, however, have they been able to
network so extensively and easily, and to propagandize their
interests with impunity to random passers-by.  High-school
teachers will recognize that there's always one in a crowd, but
when the one in a crowd escapes control by jumping into the
phone-lines, and becomes a hundred such kids all together on a
board, then trouble is brewing visibly.  The urge of authority to
DO SOMETHING, even something drastic, is hard to resist.  And in
1990, authority did something.  In fact authority did a great
deal.




  The process by which boards create hackers goes something
like this.  A youngster becomes interested in computers--usually,
computer games.  He hears from friends that "bulletin boards"
exist where games can be obtained for free.  (Many computer games
are "freeware," not copyrighted--invented simply for the love of
it and given away to the public; some of these games are quite
good.)  He bugs his parents for a modem, or quite often, uses his
parents' modem.

   The world of boards suddenly opens up.  Computer games
can be quite expensive, real budget-breakers for a kid, but
pirated games, stripped of copy protection, are cheap or free.
They are also illegal, but it is very rare, almost unheard of,
for a small-scale software pirate to be prosecuted.  Once
"cracked" of its copy protection, the program, being digital
data, becomes infinitely reproducible.  Even the instructions to
the game, any manuals that accompany it, can be reproduced as
text files, or photocopied from legitimate sets.  Other users on
boards can give many useful hints in game-playing tactics.  And a
youngster with an infinite supply of free computer games can
certainly cut quite a swath among his modem-less friends.

  And boards are pseudonymous.  No one need know that
you're fourteen years old--with a little practice at subterfuge,
you can talk to adults about adult things, and be accepted and
taken seriously!  You can even pretend to be a girl, or an old
man, or anybody you can imagine.  If you find this kind of
deception gratifying, there is ample opportunity to hone your
ability on boards.

  But local boards can grow stale.  And almost every board
maintains a list of phone-numbers to other boards, some in
distant, tempting, exotic locales.  Who knows what they're up to,
in Oregon or Alaska or Florida or California?  It's very easy to
find out--just order the modem to call through its software--
nothing to this, just typing on a keyboard, the same thing you
would do for most any computer game.  The machine reacts swiftly
and in a few seconds you are talking to a bunch of interesting
people on another seaboard.

  And yet the BILLS for this trivial action can be
staggering!  Just by going tippety-tap with your fingers, you may
have saddled your parents with four hundred bucks in long-
distance charges, and gotten chewed out but good.  That hardly
seems fair.

  How horrifying to have made friends in another state and
to be deprived of their company--and their software--just because
telephone companies demand absurd amounts of money!  How painful,
to be restricted to boards in one's own AREA CODE--what the heck
is an "area code" anyway, and what makes it so special?  A few
grumbles, complaints, and innocent questions of this sort will
often elicit a sympathetic reply from another board user--someone
with some stolen codes to hand.  You dither a while, knowing this
isn't quite right, then you make up your mind to try them
anyhow--AND THEY WORD!  Suddenly you're doing something even your
parents can't do.  Six months ago you were just some kid--now,
you're the Crimson Flash of Area Code 512!  You're bad--you're
nationwide!

  Maybe you'll stop at a few abused codes.  Maybe you'll
decide that boards aren't all that interesting after all, that
it's wrong, not worth the risk--but maybe you won't.  The next
step is to pick up your own repeat-dialling program--to learn to
generate your own stolen codes.  (This was dead easy five years
ago, much harder to get away with nowadays, but not yet
impossible.)  And these dialling programs are not complex or
intimidating--some are as small as twenty lines of software.

  Now, you too can share codes.  You can trade codes to
learn other techniques.  If you're smart enough to catch on, and
obsessive enough to want to bother, and ruthless enough to start
seriously bending rules, then you'll get better, fast.  You start
to develop a rep.  You move up to a heavier class of board--a
board with a bad attitude, the kind of board that naive dopes
like your classmates and your former self have never even heard
of!  You pick up the jargon of phreaking and hacking from the
board.  You read a few of those anarchy philes--and man, you
never realized you could be a real OUTLAW without ever leaving
your bedroom.

  You still play other computer games, but now you have a
new and bigger game.  This one will bring you a different kind of
status than destroying even eight zillion lousy space invaders.

  Hacking is perceived by hackers as a "game."  This is not
an entirely unreasonable or sociopathic perception.  You can win
or lose at hacking, succeed or fail, but it never feels "real."
It's not simply that imaginative youngsters sometimes have a hard
time telling "make-believe" from "real life."  Cyberspace is NOT
REAL!  "Real" things are physical objects like trees and shoes
and cars.  Hacking takes place on a screen.  Words aren't
physical, numbers (even telephone numbers and credit card
numbers) aren't physical.  Sticks and stones may break my bones,
but data will never hurt me.  Computers SIMULATE reality, like
computer games that simulate tank battles or dogfights or
spaceships.  Simulations are just make-believe, and the stuff in
computers is NOT REAL.

  Consider this:  if "hacking" is supposed to be so serious
and real-life and dangerous, then how come NINE-YEAR-OLD KIDS
have computers and modems?  You wouldn't give a nine year old his
own car, or his own rifle, or his own chainsaw--those things are
"real."

  People underground are perfectly aware that the "game" is
frowned upon by the powers that be.  Word gets around about busts
in the underground.  Publicizing busts is one of the primary
functions of pirate boards, but they also promulgate an attitude
about them, and their own idiosyncratic ideas of justice.  The
users of underground boards won't complain if some guy is busted
for crashing systems, spreading viruses, or stealing money by
wire-fraud.  They may shake their heads with a sneaky grin, but
they won't openly defend these practices.  But when a kid is
charged with some theoretical amount of theft:  $233,846.14, for
instance, because he sneaked into a computer and copied
something, and kept it in his house on a floppy disk--this is
regarded as a sign of near-insanity from prosecutors, a sign that
they've drastically mistaken the immaterial game of computing for
their real and boring everyday world of fatcat corporate money.

  It's as if big companies and their suck-up lawyers think
that computing belongs to them, and they can retail it with price
stickers, as if it were boxes of laundry soap!  But pricing
"information" is like trying to price air or price dreams.  Well,
anybody on a pirate board knows that computing can be, and ought
to be, FREE.  Pirate boards are little independent worlds in
cyberspace, and they don't belong to anybody but the underground.
Underground boards aren't "brought to you by Procter & Gamble."

  To log on to an underground board can mean to experience
liberation, to enter a world where, for once, money isn't
everything and adults don't have all the answers.

  Let's sample another vivid hacker manifesto.  Here are
some excerpts from "The Conscience of a Hacker," by "The Mentor,"
from PHRACK Volume One, Issue 7, Phile 3.



  "I made a discovery today.  I found a computer.  Wait a
second, this is cool.  It does what I want it to.  If it makes a
mistake, it's because I screwed it up.  Not because it doesn't
like me.(...)

  "And then it happened... a door opened to a world...
rushing through the phone line like heroin through an addict's
veins, an electronic pulse is sent out, a refuge from day-to-day
incompetencies is sought... a board is found.  'This is it...
this is where I belong...'

  "I know everyone here... even if I've never met them,
never talked to them, may never hear from them again... I know
you all...(...)

  "This is our world now.... the world of the electron and
the switch, the beauty of the baud.  We make use of a service
already existing without paying for what could be dirt-cheap if
it wasn't run by profiteering gluttons, and you call us
criminals.  We explore... and you call us criminals.  We seek
after knowledge... and you call us criminals.  We exist without
skin color, without nationality, without religious bias... and
you call us criminals.  You build atomic bombs, you wage wars,
you murder, cheat and lie to us and try to make us believe that
it's for our own good, yet we're the criminals.

  "Yes, I am a criminal.  My crime is that of curiosity.
My crime is that of judging people by what they say and think,
not what they look like.  My crime is that of outsmarting you,
something that you will never forgive me for."






  There have been underground boards almost as long as
there have been boards.  One of the first was 8BBS, which became
a stronghold of the West Coast phone-phreak elite.  After going
on-line in March 1980, 8BBS sponsored "Susan Thunder," and "Tuc,"
and, most notoriously, "the Condor."  "The Condor" bore the
singular distinction of becoming the most vilified American
phreak and hacker ever.  Angry underground associates, fed up
with Condor's peevish behavior, turned him in to police, along
with a heaping double-helping of outrageous hacker legendry.  As
a result, Condor was kept in solitary confinement for seven
months, for fear that he might start World War Three by
triggering missile silos from the prison payphone.  (Having
served his time, Condor is now walking around loose; WWIII has
thus far conspicuously failed to occur.)

  The sysop of 8BBS was an ardent free-speech enthusiast
who simply felt that ANY attempt to restrict the expression of
his users was unconstitutional and immoral.  Swarms of the
technically curious entered 8BBS and emerged as phreaks and
hackers, until, in 1982, a friendly 8BBS alumnus passed the sysop
a new modem which had been purchased by credit-card fraud.
Police took this opportunity to seize the entire board and remove
what they considered an attractive nuisance.

  Plovernet was a powerful East Coast pirate board that
operated in both New York and Florida.  Owned and operated by
teenage hacker "Quasi Moto," Plovernet attracted five hundred
eager users in 1983.  "Emmanuel Goldstein" was one-time co-sysop
of Plovernet, along with "Lex Luthor," founder of the "Legion of
Doom" group.  Plovernet bore the signal honor of being the
original home of the "Legion of Doom," about which the reader
will be hearing a great deal, soon.

  "Pirate-80," or "P-80," run by a sysop known as "Scan-
Man," got into the game very early in Charleston, and continued
steadily for years.  P-80 flourished so flagrantly that even its
most hardened users became nervous, and some slanderously
speculated that "Scan Man" must have ties to corporate security,
a charge he vigorously denied.

  "414 Private" was the home board for the first GROUP to
attract conspicuous trouble, the teenage "414 Gang," whose
intrusions into Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and Los Alamos
military computers were to be a nine-days-wonder in 1982.

  At about this time, the first software piracy boards
began to open up, trading cracked games for the Atari 800 and the
Commodore C64.  Naturally these boards were heavily frequented by
teenagers.  And with the 1983 release of the hacker-thriller
movie WAR GAMES, the scene exploded.  It seemed that every kid in
America had demanded and gotten a modem for Christmas.  Most of
these dabbler wannabes put their modems in the attic after a few
weeks, and most of the remainder minded their P's and Q's and
stayed well out of hot water.  But some stubborn and talented
diehards had this hacker kid in WAR GAMES figured for a happening
dude.  They simply could not rest until they had contacted the
underground--or, failing that, created their own.

  In the mid-80s, underground boards sprang up like digital
fungi.  ShadowSpawn Elite.  Sherwood Forest I, II, and III.
Digital Logic Data Service in Florida, sysoped by no less a man
than "Digital Logic" himself; Lex Luthor of the Legion of Doom
was prominent on this board, since it was in his area code.
Lex's own board, "Legion of Doom," started in 1984.  The Neon
Knights ran a network of Apple-hacker boards: Neon Knights North,
South, East and West.  Free World II was run by "Major Havoc."
Lunatic Labs is still in operation as of this writing.  Dr. Ripco
in Chicago, an anything-goes anarchist board with an extensive
and raucous history, was seized by Secret Service agents in 1990
on Sundevil day, but up again almost immediately, with new
machines and scarcely diminished vigor.

  The St. Louis scene was not to rank with major centers of
American hacking such as New York and L.A.  But St. Louis did
rejoice in possession of "Knight Lightning" and "Taran King," two
of the foremost JOURNALISTS native to the underground.  Missouri
boards like Metal Shop, Metal Shop Private, Metal Shop Brewery,
may not have been the heaviest boards around in terms of illicit
expertise.  But they became boards where hackers could exchange
social gossip and try to figure out what the heck was going on
nationally--and internationally.  Gossip from Metal Shop was put
into the form of news files, then assembled into a general
electronic publication, PHRACK, a portmanteau title coined from
"phreak" and "hack."  The PHRACK editors were as obsessively
curious about other hackers as hackers were about machines.

  PHRACK, being free of charge and lively reading, began to
circulate throughout the underground.  As Taran King and Knight
Lightning left high school for college, PHRACK began to appear on
mainframe machines linked to BITNET, and, through BITNET to the
"Internet," that loose but extremely potent not-for-profit
network where academic, governmental and corporate machines trade
data through the UNIX TCP/IP protocol.  (The "Internet Worm" of
November 2-3,1988, created by Cornell grad student Robert Morris,
was to be the largest and best-publicized computer-intrusion
scandal to date.  Morris claimed that his ingenious "worm"
program was meant to harmlessly explore the Internet, but due to
bad programming, the Worm replicated out of control and crashed
some six thousand Internet computers.  Smaller-scale and less
ambitious Internet hacking was a standard for the underground
elite.)

  Most any underground board not hopelessly lame and out-
of-it would feature a complete run of PHRACK--and, possibly, the
lesser-known standards of the underground:  the LEGION OF DOOM
TECHNICAL JOURNAL, the obscene and raucous CULT OF THE DEAD COW
files, _P/HUN_ magazine, PIRATE, the SYNDICATE REPORTS, and
perhaps the highly anarcho-political ACTIVIST TIMES INCORPORATED.

  Possession of PHRACK on one's board was prima facie
evidence of a bad attitude.  PHRACK was seemingly everywhere,
aiding, abetting, and spreading the underground ethos.  And this
did not escape the attention of corporate security or the police.

  We now come to the touchy subject of police and boards.
Police, do, in fact, own boards.  In 1989, there were police-
sponsored boards in California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia,
Idaho, Michigan, Missouri, Texas, and Virginia:  boards such as
"Crime Bytes," "Crimestoppers," "All Points" and "Bullet-N-
Board."  Police officers, as private computer enthusiasts, ran
their own boards in Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut,
Florida, Missouri, Maryland, New Mexico, North Carolina, Ohio,
Tennessee and Texas.  Police boards have often proved helpful in
community relations.  Sometimes crimes are reported on police
boards.

  Sometimes crimes are COMMITTED on police boards.  This
has sometimes happened by accident, as naive hackers blunder onto
police boards and blithely begin offering telephone codes.  Far
more often, however, it occurs through the now almost-traditional
use of "sting boards."  The first police sting-boards were
established in 1985:  "Underground Tunnel" in Austin, Texas,
whose sysop Sgt. Robert Ansley called himself "Pluto"--"The Phone
Company" in Phoenix, Arizona, run by Ken MacLeod of the Maricopa
County Sheriff's office--and Sgt. Dan Pasquale's board in
Fremont, California.  Sysops posed as hackers, and swiftly
garnered coteries of ardent users, who posted codes and loaded
pirate software with abandon, and came to a sticky end.

  Sting boards, like other boards, are cheap to operate,
very cheap by the standards of undercover police operations.
Once accepted by the local underground, sysops will likely be
invited into other pirate boards, where they can compile more
dossiers.  And when the sting is announced and the worst
offenders arrested, the publicity is generally gratifying.  The
resultant paranoia in the underground--perhaps more justly
described as a "deterrence effect"--tends to quell local
lawbreaking for quite a while.

  Obviously police do not have to beat the underbrush for
hackers.  On the contrary, they can go trolling for them.  Those
caught can be grilled.  Some become useful informants.  They can
lead the way to pirate boards all across the country.

  And boards all across the country showed the sticky
fingerprints of PHRACK, and of that loudest and most flagrant of
all underground groups, the "Legion of Doom."

  The term "Legion of Doom" came from comic books.  The
Legion of Doom, a conspiracy of costumed super-villains headed by
the chrome-domed criminal ultra-mastermind Lex Luthor, gave
Superman a lot of four-color graphic trouble for a number of
decades.  Of course, Superman, that exemplar of Truth, Justice,
and the American Way, always won in the long run.  This didn't
matter to the hacker Doomsters--"Legion of Doom" was not some
thunderous and evil Satanic reference, it was not meant to be
taken seriously.  "Legion of Doom" came from funny-books and was
supposed to be funny.

  "Legion of Doom" did have a good mouthfilling ring to it,
though.  It sounded really cool.  Other groups, such as the
"Farmers of Doom," closely allied to LoD, recognized this
grandiloquent quality, and made fun of it.  There was even a
hacker group called "Justice League of America," named after
Superman's club of true-blue crimefighting superheros.

  But they didn't last; the Legion did.

  The original Legion of Doom, hanging out on Quasi Moto's
Plovernet board, were phone phreaks.  They weren't much into
computers.  "Lex Luthor" himself (who was under eighteen when he
formed the Legion) was a COSMOS expert, COSMOS being the "Central
System for Mainframe Operations," a telco internal computer
network.  Lex would eventually become quite a dab hand at
breaking into IBM mainframes, but although everyone liked Lex and
admired his attitude, he was not considered a truly accomplished
computer intruder.  Nor was he the "mastermind" of the Legion of
Doom--LoD were never big on formal leadership.  As a regular on
Plovernet and sysop of his "Legion of Doom BBS," Lex was the
Legion's cheerleader and recruiting officer.

  Legion of Doom began on the ruins of an earlier phreak
group, The Knights of Shadow.  Later, LoD was to subsume the
personnel of the hacker group "Tribunal of Knowledge."  People
came and went constantly in LoD; groups split up or formed
offshoots.

  Early on, the LoD phreaks befriended a few computer-
intrusion enthusiasts, who became the associated "Legion of
Hackers."  Then the two groups conflated into the "Legion of
Doom/Hackers," or LoD/H.  When the original "hacker" wing,
Messrs. "Compu-Phreak" and "Phucked Agent 04," found other
matters to occupy their time, the extra "/H" slowly atrophied out
of the name; but by this time the phreak wing, Messrs.  Lex
Luthor, "Blue Archer," "Gary Seven," "Kerrang Khan," "Master of
Impact," "Silver Spy," "The Marauder," and "The Videosmith," had
picked up a plethora of intrusion expertise and had become a
force to be reckoned with.

  LoD members seemed to have an instinctive understanding
that the way to real power in the underground lay through covert
publicity.  LoD were flagrant.  Not only was it one of the
earliest groups, but the members took pains to widely distribute
their illicit knowledge.  Some LoD members, like "The Mentor,"
were close to evangelical about it.  LEGION OF DOOM TECHNICAL
JOURNAL began to show up on boards throughout the underground.

  LOD TECHNICAL JOURNAL was named in cruel parody of the
ancient and honored AT&T TECHNICAL JOURNAL.  The material in
these two publications was quite similar--much of it, adopted
from public journals and discussions in the telco community.  And
yet, the predatory attitude of LoD made even its most innocuous
data seem deeply sinister; an outrage; a clear and present
danger.

  To see why this should be, let's consider the following
(invented) paragraphs, as a kind of thought experiment.

  (A)  "W. Fred Brown, AT&T Vice President for Advanced
Technical Development, testified May 8 at a Washington hearing
of the National Telecommunications and Information Administration
(NTIA), regarding Bellcore's GARDEN project.  GARDEN (Generalized
Automatic Remote Distributed Electronic Network) is a telephone-
switch programming tool that makes it possible to develop new
telecom services, including hold-on-hold and customized message
transfers, from any keypad terminal, within seconds.  The GARDEN
prototype combines centrex lines with a minicomputer using UNIX
operating system software."

  (B)  "Crimson Flash 512 of the Centrex Mobsters reports:
D00dz, you wouldn't believe this GARDEN bullshit Bellcore's just
come up with!  Now you don't even need a lousy Commodore to
reprogram a switch--just log on to GARDEN as a technician, and
you can reprogram switches right off the keypad in any public
phone booth!  You can give yourself hold-on-hold and customized
message transfers, and best of all, the thing is run off
(notoriously insecure) centrex lines using--get this--standard
UNIX software!  Ha ha ha ha!"

  Message (A), couched in typical techno-bureaucratese,
appears tedious and almost unreadable.  (A) scarcely seems
threatening or menacing.  Message (B), on the other hand, is a
dreadful thing, prima facie evidence of a dire conspiracy,
definitely not the kind of thing you want your teenager reading.

  The INFORMATION, however, is identical.  It is PUBLIC
information, presented before the federal government in an open
hearing.  It is not "secret."  It is not "proprietary."  It is
not even "confidential."  On the contrary, the development of
advanced software systems is a matter of great public pride to
Bellcore.

  However, when Bellcore publicly announces a project of
this kind, it expects a certain attitude from the public--
something along the lines of GOSH WOW, YOU GUYS ARE GREAT, KEEP
THAT UP, WHATEVER IT IS--certainly not cruel mimickry, one-
upmanship and outrageous speculations about possible security
holes.

  Now put yourself in the place of a policeman confronted
by an outraged parent, or telco official, with a copy of Version
(B).  This well-meaning citizen, to his horror, has discovered a
local bulletin-board carrying outrageous stuff like (B), which
his son is examining with a deep and unhealthy interest.  If (B)
were printed in a book or magazine, you, as an American law
enforcement officer, would know that it would take a hell of a
lot of trouble to do anything about it; but it doesn't take
technical genius to recognize that if there's a computer in your
area harboring stuff like (B), there's going to be trouble.

  In fact, if you ask around, any computer-literate cop
will tell you straight out that boards with stuff like (B) are
the SOURCE of trouble.  And the WORST source of trouble on boards
are the ringleaders inventing and spreading stuff like (B).  If
it weren't for these jokers, there wouldn't BE any trouble.

  And Legion of Doom were on boards like nobody else.
Plovernet.  The Legion of Doom Board.  The Farmers of Doom Board.
Metal Shop.  OSUNY.  Blottoland.  Private Sector.  Atlantis.
Digital Logic.  Hell Phrozen Over.

  LoD members also ran their own boards.  "Silver Spy"
started his own board, "Catch-22," considered one of the heaviest
around.  So did "Mentor," with his "Phoenix Project."  When they
didn't run boards themselves, they showed up on other people's
boards, to brag, boast, and strut.  And where they themselves
didn't go, their philes went, carrying evil knowledge and an even
more evil attitude.

  As early as 1986, the police were under the vague
impression that EVERYONE in the underground was Legion of Doom.
LoD was never that large--considerably smaller than either "Metal
Communications" or "The Administration," for instance--but LoD
got tremendous press.  Especially in PHRACK, which at times read
like an LoD fan magazine; and PHRACK was everywhere, especially
in the offices of telco security.  You couldn't GET busted as a
phone phreak, a hacker, or even a lousy codes kid or warez dood,
without the cops asking if you were LoD.

  This was a difficult charge to deny, as LoD never
distributed membership badges or laminated ID cards.  If they
had, they would likely have died out quickly, for turnover in
their membership was considerable.  LoD was less a high-tech
street-gang than an ongoing state-of-mind.  LoD was the Gang That
Refused to Die.  By 1990, LoD had RULED for ten years, and it
seemed WEIRD to police that they were continually busting people
who were only sixteen years old.  All these teenage small-timers
were pleading the tiresome hacker litany of "just curious, no
criminal intent."  Somewhere at the center of this conspiracy
there had to be some serious adult masterminds, not this
seemingly endless supply of myopic suburban white kids with high
SATs and funny haircuts.

  There was no question that most any American hacker
arrested would "know" LoD.  They knew the handles of contributors
to LOD TECH JOURNAL, and were likely to have learned their craft
through LoD boards and LoD activism.  But they'd never met anyone
from LoD.  Even some of the rotating cadre who were actually and
formally "in LoD" knew one another only by board-mail and
pseudonyms.  This was a highly unconventional profile for a
criminal conspiracy.  Computer networking, and the rapid
evolution of the digital underground, made the situation very
diffuse and confusing.

  Furthermore, a big reputation in the digital underground
did not coincide with one's willingness to commit "crimes."
Instead, reputation was based on cleverness and technical
mastery.  As a result, it often seemed that the HEAVIER the
hackers were, the LESS likely they were to have committed any
kind of common, easily prosecutable crime.  There were some
hackers who could really steal.  And there were hackers who could
really hack.  But the two groups didn't seem to overlap much, if
at all.  For instance, most people in the underground looked up
to "Emmanuel Goldstein" of _2600_ as a hacker demigod.  But
Goldstein's publishing activities were entirely legal--Goldstein
just printed dodgy stuff and talked about politics, he didn't
even hack.  When you came right down to it, Goldstein spent half
his time complaining that computer security WASN'T STRONG ENOUGH
and ought to be drastically improved across the board!

  Truly heavy-duty hackers, those with serious technical
skills who had earned the respect of the underground, never stole
money or abused credit cards.  Sometimes they might abuse phone-
codes--but often, they seemed to get all the free phone-time they
wanted without leaving a trace of any kind.

  The best hackers, the most powerful and technically
accomplished, were not professional fraudsters.  They raided
computers habitually, but wouldn't alter anything, or damage
anything.  They didn't even steal computer equipment--most had
day-jobs messing with hardware, and could get all the cheap
secondhand equipment they wanted.  The hottest hackers, unlike
the teenage wannabes, weren't snobs about fancy or expensive
hardware.  Their machines tended to be raw second-hand digital
hot-rods full of custom add-ons that they'd cobbled together out
of chickenwire, memory chips and spit.  Some were adults,
computer software writers and consultants by trade, and making
quite good livings at it.  Some of them ACTUALLY WORKED FOR THE
PHONE COMPANY--and for those, the "hackers" actually found under
the skirts of Ma Bell, there would be little mercy in 1990.

  It has long been an article of faith in the underground
that the "best" hackers never get caught.  They're far too smart,
supposedly.  They never get caught because they never boast,
brag, or strut.  These demigods may read underground boards (with
a condescending smile), but they never say anything there.  The
"best" hackers, according to legend, are adult computer
professionals, such as mainframe system administrators, who
already know the ins and outs of their particular brand of
security.  Even the "best" hacker can't break in to just any
computer at random: the knowledge of security holes is too
specialized, varying widely with different software and hardware.
But if people are employed to run, say, a UNIX mainframe or a
VAX/VMS machine, then they tend to learn security from the inside
out.  Armed with this knowledge, they can look into most anybody
else's UNIX or VMS without much trouble or risk, if they want to.
And, according to hacker legend, of course they want to, so of
course they do.  They just don't make a big deal of what they've
done.  So nobody ever finds out.

  It is also an article of faith in the underground that
professional telco people "phreak" like crazed weasels.  OF
COURSE they spy on Madonna's phone calls--I mean, WOULDN'T YOU?
Of course they give themselves free long-distance--why the hell
should THEY pay, they're running the whole shebang!

  It has, as a third matter, long been an article of faith
that any hacker caught can escape serious punishment if he
confesses HOW HE DID IT.  Hackers seem to believe that
governmental agencies and large corporations are blundering about
in cyberspace like eyeless jellyfish or cave salamanders.  They
feel that these large but pathetically stupid organizations will
proffer up genuine gratitude, and perhaps even a security post
and a big salary, to the hot-shot intruder who will deign to
reveal to them the supreme genius of his modus operandi.

  In the case of longtime LoD member "Control-C," this
actually happened, more or less.  Control-C had led Michigan Bell
a merry chase, and when captured in 1987, he turned out to be a
bright and apparently physically harmless young fanatic,
fascinated by phones.  There was no chance in hell that Control-C
would actually repay the enormous and largely theoretical sums in
long-distance service that he had accumulated from Michigan Bell.
He could always be indicted for fraud or computer-intrusion, but
there seemed little real point in this--he hadn't physically
damaged any computer.  He'd just plead guilty, and he'd likely
get the usual slap-on-the-wrist, and in the meantime it would be
a big hassle for Michigan Bell just to bring up the case.  But if
kept on the payroll, he might at least keep his fellow hackers at
bay.

  There were uses for him.  For instance, a contrite
Control-C was featured on Michigan Bell internal posters, sternly
warning employees to shred their trash.  He'd always gotten most
of his best inside info from "trashing"--raiding telco dumpsters,
for useful data indiscreetly thrown away.  He signed these
posters, too.  Control-C had become something like a Michigan
Bell mascot.  And in fact, Control-C DID keep other hackers at
bay.  Little hackers were quite scared of Control-C and his
heavy-duty Legion of Doom friends.  And big hackers WERE his
friends and didn't want to screw up his cushy situation.

  No matter what one might say of LoD, they did stick
together.  When "Wasp," an apparently genuinely malicious New
York hacker, began crashing Bellcore machines, Control-C received
swift volunteer help from "the Mentor" and the Georgia LoD wing
made up of "The Prophet," "Urvile," and "Leftist."  Using
Mentor's Phoenix Project board to coordinate, the Doomsters
helped telco security to trap Wasp, by luring him into a machine
with a tap and line-trace installed.  Wasp lost.  LoD won!  And
my, did they brag.

  Urvile, Prophet and Leftist were well-qualified for this
activity, probably more so even than the quite accomplished
Control-C.  The Georgia boys knew all about phone switching-
stations.  Though relative johnny-come-latelies in the Legion of
Doom, they were considered some of LoD's heaviest guys, into the
hairiest systems around.  They had the good fortune to live in or
near Atlanta, home of the sleepy and apparently tolerant
BellSouth RBOC.

  As RBOC security went, BellSouth were "cake."  US West
(of Arizona, the Rockies and the Pacific Northwest) were tough
and aggressive, probably the heaviest RBOC around.  Pacific Bell,
California's PacBell, were sleek, high-tech, and longtime
veterans of the LA phone-phreak wars.  NYNEX had the misfortune
to run the New York City area, and were warily prepared for most
anything.  Even Michigan Bell, a division of the Ameritech RBOC,
at least had the elementary sense to hire their own hacker as a
useful scarecrow.  But BellSouth, even though their corporate
P.R.  proclaimed them to have "Everything You Expect From a
Leader," were pathetic.

  When rumor about LoD's mastery of Georgia's switching
network got around to BellSouth through Bellcore and telco
security scuttlebutt, they at first refused to believe it.  If
you paid serious attention to every rumor out and about these
hacker kids, you would hear all kinds of wacko saucer-nut
nonsense:  that the National Security Agency monitored all
American phone calls, that the CIA and DEA tracked traffic on
bulletin-boards with word-analysis programs, that the Condor
could start World War III from a payphone.

  If there were hackers into BellSouth switching-stations,
then how come nothing had happened?  Nothing had been hurt.
BellSouth's machines weren't crashing.  BellSouth wasn't
suffering especially badly from fraud.  BellSouth's customers
weren't complaining.  BellSouth was headquartered in Atlanta,
ambitious metropolis of the new high-tech Sunbelt; and BellSouth
was upgrading its network by leaps and bounds, digitizing the
works left right and center.  They could hardly be considered
sluggish or naive.  BellSouth's technical expertise was second to
none, thank you kindly.

  But then came the Florida business.

  On June 13, 1989, callers to the Palm Beach County
Probation Department, in Delray Beach, Florida, found themselves
involved in a remarkable discussion with a phone-sex worker named
"Tina" in New York State.  Somehow, ANY call to this probation
office near Miami was instantly and magically transported across
state lines, at no extra charge to the user, to a pornographic
phone-sex hotline hundreds of miles away!

  This practical joke may seem utterly hilarious at first
hearing, and indeed there was a good deal of chuckling about it
in phone phreak circles, including the Autumn 1989 issue of
_2600_.  But for Southern Bell (the division of the BellSouth
RBOC supplying local service for Florida, Georgia, North Carolina
and South Carolina), this was a smoking gun.  For the first time
ever, a computer intruder had broken into a BellSouth central
office switching station and re-programmed it!

  Or so BellSouth thought in June 1989.  Actually, LoD
members had been frolicking harmlessly in BellSouth switches
since September 1987.  The stunt of June 13--call-forwarding a
number through manipulation of a switching station--was child's
play for hackers as accomplished as the Georgia wing of LoD.
Switching calls interstate sounded like a big deal, but it took
only four lines of code to accomplish this.  An easy, yet more
discreet, stunt, would be to call-forward another number to your
own house.  If you were careful and considerate, and changed the
software back later, then not a soul would know.  Except you.
And whoever you had bragged to about it.

  As for BellSouth, what they didn't know wouldn't hurt
them.

  Except now somebody had blown the whole thing wide open,
and BellSouth knew.

  A now alerted and considerably paranoid BellSouth began
searching switches right and left for signs of impropriety, in
that hot summer of 1989.  No fewer than forty-two BellSouth
employees were put on 12-hour shifts, twenty-four hours a day,
for two solid months, poring over records and monitoring
computers for any sign of phony access.  These forty-two
overworked experts were known as BellSouth's "Intrusion Task
Force."

  What the investigators found astounded them.
Proprietary telco databases had been manipulated:  phone numbers
had been created out of thin air, with no users' names and no
addresses.  And perhaps worst of all, no charges and no records
of use.  The new digital ReMOB (Remote Observation) diagnostic
feature had been extensively tampered with--hackers had learned
to reprogram ReMOB software, so that they could listen in on any
switch-routed call at their leisure!  They were using telco
property to SPY!

  The electrifying news went out throughout law
enforcement in 1989.  It had never really occurred to anyone at
BellSouth that their prized and brand-new digital switching-
stations could be RE-PROGRAMMED.  People seemed utterly amazed
that anyone could have the nerve.  Of course these switching
stations were "computers," and everybody knew hackers liked to
"break into computers":  but telephone people's computers were
DIFFERENT from normal people's computers.

   The exact reason WHY these computers were "different"
was rather ill-defined.  It certainly wasn't the extent of their
security.  The security on these BellSouth computers was lousy;
the AIMSX computers, for instance, didn't even have passwords.
But there was no question that BellSouth strongly FELT that their
computers were very different indeed.  And if there were some
criminals out there who had not gotten that message, BellSouth
was determined to see that message taught.

  After all, a 5ESS switching station was no mere
bookkeeping system for some local chain of florists.  Public
service depended on these stations.  Public SAFETY depended on
these stations.

  And hackers, lurking in there call-forwarding or
ReMobbing, could spy on anybody in the local area!  They could
spy on telco officials!  They could spy on police stations!  They
could spy on local offices of the Secret Service....

  In 1989, electronic cops and hacker-trackers began using
scrambler-phones and secured lines.  It only made sense.  There
was no telling who was into those systems.  Whoever they were,
they sounded scary.  This was some new level of antisocial
daring.  Could be West German hackers, in the pay of the KGB.
That too had seemed a weird and farfetched notion, until Clifford
Stoll had poked and prodded a sluggish Washington law-enforcement
bureaucracy into investigating a computer intrusion that turned
out to be exactly that--HACKERS, IN THE PAY OF THE KGB! Stoll,
the systems manager for an Internet lab in Berkeley California,
had ended up on the front page of the NEW YORK TIMES, proclaimed
a national hero in the first true story of international computer
espionage.  Stoll's counterspy efforts, which he related in a
bestselling book, THE CUCKOO'S EGG, in 1989, had established the
credibility of 'hacking' as a possible threat to national
security.  The United States Secret Service doesn't mess around
when it suspects a possible action by a foreign intelligence
apparat.

  The Secret Service scrambler-phones and secured lines put
a tremendous kink in law enforcement's ability to operate freely;
to get the word out, cooperate, prevent misunderstandings.
Nevertheless, 1989 scarcely seemed the time for half-measures.
If the police and Secret Service themselves were not
operationally secure, then how could they reasonably demand
measures of security from private enterprise?  At least, the
inconvenience made people aware of the seriousness of the
threat.

  If there was a final spur needed to get the police off
the dime, it came in the realization that the emergency 911
system was vulnerable.  The 911 system has its own specialized
software, but it is run on the same digital switching systems as
the rest of the telephone network.  911 is not physically
different from normal telephony.  But it is certainly culturally
different, because this is the area of telephonic cyberspace
reserved for the police and emergency services.

  Your average policeman may not know much about hackers or
phone-phreaks.  Computer people are weird; even computer COPS are
rather weird; the stuff they do is hard to figure out.  But a
threat to the 911 system is anything but an abstract threat.  If
the 911 system goes, people can die.

  Imagine being in a car-wreck, staggering to a phone-
booth, punching 911 and hearing "Tina" pick up the phone-sex line
somewhere in New York!  The situation's no longer comical,
somehow.

  And was it possible?  No question.  Hackers had attacked
911 systems before.  Phreaks can max-out 911 systems just by
siccing a bunch of computer-modems on them in tandem, dialling
them over and over until they clog.  That's very crude and low-
tech, but it's still a serious business.

  The time had come for action.  It was time to take stern
measures with the underground.  It was time to start picking up
the dropped threads, the loose edges, the bits of braggadocio
here and there; it was time to get on the stick and start putting
serious casework together.  Hackers weren't "invisible."  They
THOUGHT they were invisible; but the truth was, they had just
been tolerated too long.

  Under sustained police attention in the summer of '89,
the digital underground began to unravel as never before.

  The first big break in the case came very early on:  July
1989, the following month.  The perpetrator of the "Tina" switch
was caught, and confessed.  His name was "Fry Guy," a 16-year-old
in Indiana.  Fry Guy had been a very wicked young man.

  Fry Guy had earned his handle from a stunt involving
French fries.  Fry Guy had filched the log-in of a local
MacDonald's manager and had logged-on to the MacDonald's
mainframe on the Sprint Telenet system.  Posing as the manager,
Fry Guy had altered MacDonald's records, and given some teenage
hamburger-flipping friends of his, generous raises.  He had not
been caught.

  Emboldened by success, Fry Guy moved on to credit-card
abuse.  Fry Guy was quite an accomplished talker; with a gift for
"social engineering."  If you can do "social engineering"--fast-
talk, fake-outs, impersonation, conning, scamming--then card
abuse comes easy.  (Getting away with it in the long run is
another question).

  Fry Guy had run across "Urvile" of the Legion of Doom on
the ALTOS Chat board in Bonn, Germany.  ALTOS Chat was a
sophisticated board, accessible through globe-spanning computer
networks like BITnet, Tymnet, and Telenet.  ALTOS was much
frequented by members of Germany's Chaos Computer Club.  Two
Chaos hackers who hung out on ALTOS, "Jaeger" and "Pengo," had
been the central villains of Clifford Stoll's CUCKOO'S EGG case:
consorting in East Berlin with a spymaster from the KGB, and
breaking into American computers for hire, through the Internet.

  When LoD members learned the story of Jaeger's
depredations from Stoll's book, they were rather less than
impressed, technically speaking.  On LoD's own favorite board of
the moment, "Black Ice," LoD members bragged that they themselves
could have done all the Chaos break-ins in a week flat!
Nevertheless, LoD were grudgingly impressed by the Chaos rep, the
sheer hairy-eyed daring of hash-smoking anarchist hackers who had
rubbed shoulders with the fearsome big-boys of international
Communist espionage.  LoD members sometimes traded bits of
knowledge with friendly German hackers on ALTOS--phone numbers
for vulnerable VAX/VMS computers in Georgia, for instance.  Dutch
and British phone phreaks, and the Australian clique of
"Phoenix," "Nom," and "Electron," were ALTOS regulars, too.  In
underground circles, to hang out on ALTOS was considered the sign
of an elite dude, a sophisticated hacker of the international
digital jet-set.

  Fry Guy quickly learned how to raid information from
credit-card consumer-reporting agencies.  He had over a hundred
stolen credit-card numbers in his notebooks, and upwards of a
thousand swiped long-distance access codes.  He knew how to get
onto Altos, and how to talk the talk of the underground
convincingly.  He now wheedled knowledge of switching-station
tricks from Urvile on the ALTOS system.

  Combining these two forms of knowledge enabled Fry Guy to
bootstrap his way up to a new form of wire-fraud.  First, he'd
snitched credit card numbers from credit-company computers.  The
data he copied included names, addresses and phone numbers of the
random card-holders.

  Then Fry Guy, impersonating a card-holder, called up
Western Union and asked for a cash advance on "his" credit card.
Western Union, as a security guarantee, would call the customer
back, at home, to verify the transaction.

  But, just as he had switched the Florida probation office
to "Tina" in New York, Fry Guy switched the card-holder's number
to a local pay-phone.  There he would lurk in wait, muddying his
trail by routing and re-routing the call, through switches as far
away as Canada.  When the call came through, he would boldly
"social-engineer," or con, the Western Union people, pretending
to be the legitimate card-holder.  Since he'd answered the proper
phone number, the deception was not very hard.  Western Union's
money was then shipped to a confederate of Fry Guy's in his home
town in Indiana.

  Fry Guy and his cohort, using LoD techniques, stole six
thousand dollars from Western Union between December 1988 and
July 1989.  They also dabbled in ordering delivery of stolen
goods through card-fraud.  Fry Guy was intoxicated with success.
The sixteen-year-old fantasized wildly to hacker rivals, boasting
that he'd used rip-off money to hire himself a big limousine, and
had driven out-of-state with a groupie from his favorite heavy-
metal band, Motley Crue.

  Armed with knowledge, power, and a gratifying stream of
free money, Fry Guy now took it upon himself to call local
representatives of Indiana Bell security, to brag, boast, strut,
and utter tormenting warnings that his powerful friends in the
notorious Legion of Doom could crash the national telephone
network.  Fry Guy even named a date for the scheme:  the Fourth
of July, a national holiday.

  This egregious example of the begging-for-arrest syndrome
was shortly followed by Fry Guy's arrest.  After the Indiana
telephone company figured out who he was, the Secret Service had
DNRs--Dialed Number Recorders--installed on his home phone lines.
These devices are not taps, and can't record the substance of
phone calls, but they do record the phone numbers of all calls
going in and out.  Tracing these numbers showed Fry Guy's long-
distance code fraud, his extensive ties to pirate bulletin
boards, and numerous personal calls to his LoD friends in
Atlanta.  By July 11, 1989, Prophet, Urvile and Leftist also had
Secret Service DNR "pen registers" installed on their own lines.

  The Secret Service showed up in force at Fry Guy's house
on July 22, 1989, to the horror of his unsuspecting parents.  The
raiders were led by a special agent from the Secret Service's
Indianapolis office.  However, the raiders were accompanied and
advised by Timothy M. Foley of the Secret Service's Chicago
office (a gentleman about whom we will soon be hearing a great
deal).

  Following federal computer-crime techniques that had been
standard since the early 1980s, the Secret Service searched the
house thoroughly, and seized all of Fry Guy's electronic
equipment and notebooks.  All Fry Guy's equipment went out the
door in the custody of the Secret Service, which put a swift end
to his depredations.

  The USSS interrogated Fry Guy at length.  His case was
put in the charge of Deborah Daniels, the federal US Attorney for
the Southern District of Indiana.  Fry Guy was charged with
eleven counts of computer fraud, unauthorized computer access,
and wire fraud.  The evidence was thorough and irrefutable.  For
his part, Fry Guy blamed his corruption on the Legion of Doom and
offered to testify against them.

  Fry Guy insisted that the Legion intended to crash the
phone system on a national holiday.  And when AT&T crashed on
Martin Luther King Day, 1990, this lent a credence to his claim
that genuinely alarmed telco security and the Secret Service.

  Fry Guy eventually pled guilty on May 31, 1990.  On
September 14, he was sentenced to forty-four months' probation
and four hundred hours' community service.  He could have had it
much worse; but it made sense to prosecutors to take it easy on
this teenage minor, while zeroing in on the notorious kingpins of
the Legion of Doom.

  But the case against LoD had nagging flaws.  Despite the
best effort of investigators, it was impossible to prove that the
Legion had crashed the phone system on January 15, because they,
in fact, hadn't done so.  The investigations of 1989 did show
that certain members of the Legion of Doom had achieved
unprecedented power over the telco switching stations, and that
they were in active conspiracy to obtain more power yet.
Investigators were privately convinced that the Legion of Doom
intended to do awful things with this knowledge, but mere evil
intent was not enough to put them in jail.

  And although the Atlanta Three--Prophet, Leftist, and
especially Urvile--had taught Fry Guy plenty, they were not
themselves credit-card fraudsters.  The only thing they'd
"stolen" was long-distance service--and since they'd done much of
that through phone-switch manipulation, there was no easy way to
judge how much they'd "stolen," or whether this practice was even
"theft" of any easily recognizable kind.

  Fry Guy's theft of long-distance codes had cost the phone
companies plenty.  The theft of long-distance service may be a
fairly theoretical "loss," but it costs genuine money and genuine
time to delete all those stolen codes, and to re-issue new codes
to the innocent owners of those corrupted codes.  The owners of
the codes themselves are victimized, and lose time and money and
peace of mind in the hassle.  And then there were the credit-card
victims to deal with, too, and Western Union.  When it came to
rip-off, Fry Guy was far more of a thief than LoD.  It was only
when it came to actual computer expertise that Fry Guy was small
potatoes.

  The Atlanta Legion thought most "rules" of cyberspace
were for rodents and losers, but they DID have rules.  THEY NEVER
CRASHED ANYTHING, AND THEY NEVER TOOK MONEY.  These were rough
rules-of-thumb, and rather dubious principles when it comes to
the ethical subtleties of cyberspace, but they enabled the
Atlanta Three to operate with a relatively clear conscience
(though never with peace of mind).

  If you didn't hack for money, if you weren't robbing
people of actual funds--money in the bank, that is--then nobody
REALLY got hurt, in LoD's opinion.  "Theft of service" was a
bogus issue, and "intellectual property" was a bad joke.  But LoD
had only elitist contempt for rip-off artists, "leechers,"
thieves.  They considered themselves clean.  In their opinion, if
you didn't smash-up or crash any systems--(well, not on purpose,
anyhow--accidents can happen, just ask Robert Morris) then it was
very unfair to call you a "vandal" or a "cracker."  When you were
hanging out on-line with your "pals" in telco security, you could
face them down from the higher plane of hacker morality.  And you
could mock the police from the supercilious heights of your
hacker's quest for pure knowledge.

  But from the point of view of law enforcement and telco
security, however, Fry Guy was not really dangerous.  The Atlanta
Three WERE dangerous.  It wasn't the crimes they were committing,
but the DANGER, the potential hazard, the sheer TECHNICAL POWER
LoD had accumulated, that had made the situation untenable.

  Fry Guy was not LoD.  He'd never laid eyes on anyone in
LoD; his only contacts with them had been electronic.  Core
members of the Legion of Doom tended to meet physically for
conventions every year or so, to get drunk, give each other the
hacker high-sign, send out for pizza and ravage hotel suites.
Fry Guy had never done any of this.  Deborah Daniels assessed Fry
Guy accurately as "an LoD wannabe."

  Nevertheless Fry Guy's crimes would be directly
attributed to LoD in much future police propaganda.  LoD would be
described as "a closely knit group" involved in "numerous illegal
activities" including "stealing and modifying individual credit
histories," and "fraudulently obtaining money and property."  Fry
Guy did this, but the Atlanta Three didn't; they simply weren't
into theft, but rather intrusion.  This caused a strange kink in
the prosecution's strategy.  LoD were accused of "disseminating
information about attacking computers to other computer hackers
in an effort to shift the focus of law enforcement to those other
hackers and away from the Legion of Doom."

  This last accusation (taken directly from a press release
by the Chicago Computer Fraud and Abuse Task Force) sounds
particularly far-fetched.  One might conclude at this point that
investigators would have been well-advised to go ahead and "shift
their focus" from the "Legion of Doom."  Maybe they SHOULD
concentrate on "those other hackers"--the ones who were actually
stealing money and physical objects.

  But the Hacker Crackdown of 1990 was not a simple
policing action.  It wasn't meant just to walk the beat in
cyberspace--it was a CRACKDOWN, a deliberate attempt to nail the
core of the operation, to send a dire and potent message that
would settle the hash of the digital underground for good.

  By this reasoning, Fry Guy wasn't much more than the
electronic equivalent of a cheap streetcorner dope dealer.  As
long as the masterminds of LoD were still flagrantly operating,
pushing their mountains of illicit knowledge right and left, and
whipping up enthusiasm for blatant lawbreaking, then there would
be an INFINITE SUPPLY of Fry Guys.

  Because LoD were flagrant, they had left trails
everywhere, to be picked up by law enforcement in New York,
Indiana, Florida, Texas, Arizona, Missouri, even Australia.  But
1990's war on the Legion of Doom was led out of Illinois, by the
Chicago Computer Fraud and Abuse Task Force.




  The Computer Fraud and Abuse Task Force, led by federal
prosecutor William J. Cook, had started in 1987 and had swiftly
become one of the most aggressive local "dedicated computer-crime
units."  Chicago was a natural home for such a group.  The
world's first computer bulletin-board system had been invented in
Illinois.  The state of Illinois had some of the nation's first
and sternest computer crime laws.  Illinois State Police were
markedly alert to the possibilities of white-collar crime and
electronic fraud.

  And William J. Cook in particular was a rising star in
electronic crime-busting.  He and his fellow federal prosecutors
at the U.S. Attorney's office in Chicago had a tight relation
with the Secret Service, especially go-getting Chicago-based
agent Timothy Foley.  While Cook and his Department of Justice
colleagues plotted strategy, Foley was their man on the street.

  Throughout the 1980s, the federal government had given
prosecutors an armory of new, untried legal tools against
computer crime.  Cook and his colleagues were pioneers in the use
of these new statutes in the real-life cut-and-thrust of the
federal courtroom.

  On October 2, 1986, the US Senate had passed the
"Computer Fraud and Abuse Act" unanimously, but there were
pitifully few convictions under this statute.  Cook's group took
their name from this statute, since they were determined to
transform this powerful but rather theoretical Act of Congress
into a real-life engine of legal destruction against computer
fraudsters and scofflaws.

  It was not a question of merely discovering crimes,
investigating them, and then trying and punishing their
perpetrators.  The Chicago unit, like most everyone else in the
business, already KNEW who the bad guys were:  the Legion of Doom
and the writers and editors of PHRACK. The task at hand was to
find some legal means of putting these characters away.

  This approach might seem a bit dubious, to someone not
acquainted with the gritty realities of prosecutorial work.  But
prosecutors don't put people in jail for crimes they have
committed; they put people in jail for crimes they have committed
THAT CAN BE PROVED IN COURT.  Chicago federal police put Al
Capone in prison for income-tax fraud.  Chicago is a big town,
with a rough-and-ready bare-knuckle tradition on both sides of
the law.

  Fry Guy had broken the case wide open and alerted telco
security to the scope of the problem.  But Fry Guy's crimes would
not put the Atlanta Three behind bars--much less the wacko
underground journalists of PHRACK.  So on July 22, 1989, the same
day that Fry Guy was raided in Indiana, the Secret Service
descended upon the Atlanta Three.

  This was likely inevitable.  By the summer of 1989, law
enforcement were closing in on the Atlanta Three from at least
six directions at once.  First, there were the leads from Fry
Guy, which had led to the DNR registers being installed on the
lines of the Atlanta Three.  The DNR evidence alone would have
finished them off, sooner or later.

  But second, the Atlanta lads were already well-known to
Control-C and his telco security sponsors.  LoD's contacts with
telco security had made them overconfident and even more boastful
than usual; they felt that they had powerful friends in high
places, and that they were being openly tolerated by telco
security.  But BellSouth's Intrusion Task Force were hot on the
trail of LoD and sparing no effort or expense.

  The Atlanta Three had also been identified by name and
listed on the extensive anti-hacker files maintained, and
retailed for pay, by private security operative John Maxfield of
Detroit.  Maxfield, who had extensive ties to telco security and
many informants in the underground, was a bete noire of the
PHRACK crowd, and the dislike was mutual.

  The Atlanta Three themselves had written articles for
PHRACK.  This boastful act could not possibly escape telco and
law enforcement attention.

  "Knightmare," a high-school age hacker from Arizona, was
a close friend and disciple of Atlanta LoD, but he had been
nabbed by the formidable Arizona Organized Crime and Racketeering
Unit.  Knightmare was on some of LoD's favorite boards--"Black
Ice" in particular--and was privy to their secrets.  And to have
Gail Thackeray, the Assistant Attorney General of Arizona, on
one's trail was a dreadful peril for any hacker.

  And perhaps worst of all, Prophet had committed a major
blunder by passing an illicitly copied BellSouth computer-file to
Knight Lightning, who had published it in PHRACK.  This, as we
will see, was an act of dire consequence for almost everyone
concerned.

  On July 22, 1989, the Secret Service showed up at the
Leftist's house, where he lived with his parents.  A massive
squad of some twenty officers surrounded the building: Secret
Service, federal marshals, local police, possibly BellSouth telco
security; it was hard to tell in the crush.  Leftist's dad, at
work in his basement office, first noticed a muscular stranger in
plain clothes crashing through the back yard with a drawn pistol.
As more strangers poured into the house, Leftist's dad naturally
assumed there was an armed robbery in progress.

  Like most hacker parents, Leftist's mom and dad had only
the vaguest notions of what their son had been up to all this
time.  Leftist had a day-job repairing computer hardware.  His
obsession with computers seemed a bit odd, but harmless enough,
and likely to produce a well-paying career.  The sudden,
overwhelming raid left Leftist's parents traumatized.

  The Leftist himself had been out after work with his co-
workers, surrounding a couple of pitchers of margaritas.  As he
came trucking on tequila-numbed feet up the pavement, toting a
bag full of floppy-disks, he noticed a large number of unmarked
cars parked in his driveway.  All the cars sported tiny microwave
antennas.

  The Secret Service had knocked the front door off its
hinges, almost flattening his Mom.

  Inside, Leftist was greeted by Special Agent James Cool
of the US Secret Service, Atlanta office.  Leftist was
flabbergasted.  He'd never met a Secret Service agent before.  He
could not imagine that he'd ever done anything worthy of federal
attention.  He'd always figured that if his activities became
intolerable, one of his contacts in telco security would give him
a private phone-call and tell him to knock it off.

  But now Leftist was pat-searched for weapons by grim
professionals, and his bag of floppies was quickly seized.  He
and his parents were all shepherded into separate rooms and
grilled at length as a score of officers scoured their home for
anything electronic.

  Leftist was horrified as his treasured IBM AT personal
computer with its forty-meg hard disk, and his recently purchased
80386 IBM-clone with a whopping hundred-meg hard disk, both went
swiftly out the door in Secret Service custody.  They also seized
all his disks, all his notebooks, and a tremendous booty in
dogeared telco documents that Leftist had snitched out of trash
dumpsters.

  Leftist figured the whole thing for a big
misunderstanding.  He'd never been into MILITARY computers.  He
wasn't a SPY or a COMMUNIST.  He was just a good ol' Georgia
hacker, and now he just wanted all these people out of the house.
But it seemed they wouldn't go until he made some kind of
statement.

  And so, he levelled with them.

  And that, Leftist said later from his federal prison camp
in Talladega, Alabama, was a big mistake.

  The Atlanta area was unique, in that it had three members
of the Legion of Doom who actually occupied more or less the same
physical locality.  Unlike the rest of LoD, who tended to
associate by phone and computer, Atlanta LoD actually WERE
"tightly knit."  It was no real surprise that the Secret Service
agents apprehending Urvile at the computer-labs at Georgia Tech,
would discover Prophet with him as well.

  Urvile, a 21-year-old Georgia Tech student in polymer
chemistry, posed quite a puzzling case for law enforcement.
Urvile--also known as "Necron 99," as well as other handles, for
he tended to change his cover-alias about once a month--was both
an accomplished hacker and a fanatic simulation-gamer.

  Simulation games are an unusual hobby; but then hackers
are unusual people, and their favorite pastimes tend to be
somewhat out of the ordinary.  The best-known American simulation
game is probably "Dungeons & Dragons," a multi-player parlor
entertainment played with paper, maps, pencils, statistical
tables and a variety of oddly-shaped dice.  Players pretend to be
heroic characters exploring a wholly-invented fantasy world.  The
fantasy worlds of simulation gaming are commonly pseudo-medieval,
involving swords and sorcery--spell-casting wizards, knights in
armor, unicorns and dragons, demons and goblins.

  Urvile and his fellow gamers preferred their fantasies
highly technological.  They made use of a game known as
"G.U.R.P.S.," the "Generic Universal Role Playing System,"
published by a company called Steve Jackson Games (SJG).

  "G.U.R.P.S." served as a framework for creating a wide
variety of artificial fantasy worlds.  Steve Jackson Games
published a smorgasboard of books, full of detailed information
and gaming hints, which were used to flesh-out many different
fantastic backgrounds for the basic GURPS framework.  Urvile
made extensive use of two SJG books called GURPS HIGH-TECH and
GURPS SPECIAL OPS.

  In the artificial fantasy-world of GURPS SPECIAL OPS,
players entered a modern fantasy of intrigue and international
espionage.  On beginning the game, players started small and
powerless, perhaps as minor-league CIA agents or penny-ante arms
dealers.  But as players persisted through a series of game
sessions (game sessions generally lasted for hours, over long,
elaborate campaigns that might be pursued for months on end) then
they would achieve new skills, new knowledge, new power.  They
would acquire and hone new abilities, such as marksmanship,
karate, wiretapping, or Watergate burglary.  They could also win
various kinds of imaginary booty, like Berettas, or martini
shakers, or fast cars with ejection seats and machine-guns under
the headlights.

  As might be imagined from the complexity of these games,
Urvile's gaming notes were very detailed and extensive.  Urvile
was a "dungeon-master," inventing scenarios for his fellow
gamers, giant simulated adventure-puzzles for his friends to
unravel.  Urvile's game notes covered dozens of pages with all
sorts of exotic lunacy, all about ninja raids on Libya and break-
ins on encrypted Red Chinese supercomputers.  His notes were
written on scrap-paper and kept in loose-leaf binders.

  The handiest scrap paper around Urvile's college digs
were the many pounds of BellSouth printouts and documents that he
had snitched out of telco dumpsters.  His notes were written on
the back of misappropriated telco property.  Worse yet, the
gaming notes were chaotically interspersed with Urvile's hand-
scrawled records involving ACTUAL COMPUTER INTRUSIONS that he had
committed.

  Not only was it next to impossible to tell Urvile's
fantasy game-notes from cyberspace "reality," but Urvile himself
barely made this distinction.  It's no exaggeration to say that
to Urvile it was ALL a game.  Urvile was very bright, highly
imaginative, and quite careless of other people's notions of
propriety.  His connection to "reality" was not something to
which he paid a great deal of attention.

  Hacking was a game for Urvile.  It was an amusement he
was carrying out, it was something he was doing for fun.  And
Urvile was an obsessive young man.  He could no more stop hacking
than he could stop in the middle of a jigsaw puzzle, or stop in
the middle of reading a Stephen Donaldson fantasy trilogy.  (The
name "Urvile" came from a best-selling Donaldson novel.)

  Urvile's airy, bulletproof attitude seriously annoyed his
interrogators.  First of all, he didn't consider that he'd done
anything wrong.  There was scarcely a shred of honest remorse in
him.  On the contrary, he seemed privately convinced that his
police interrogators were operating in a demented fantasy-world
all their own.  Urvile was too polite and well-behaved to say
this straight-out, but his reactions were askew and disquieting.

  For instance, there was the business about LoD's ability
to monitor phone-calls to the police and Secret Service.  Urvile
agreed that this was quite possible, and posed no big problem for
LoD.  In fact, he and his friends had kicked the idea around on
the "Black Ice" board, much as they had discussed many other
nifty notions, such as building personal flame-throwers and jury-
rigging fistfulls of blasting-caps.  They had hundreds of dial-up
numbers for government agencies that they'd gotten through
scanning Atlanta phones, or had pulled from raided VAX/VMS
mainframe computers.

  Basically, they'd never gotten around to listening in on
the cops because the idea wasn't interesting enough to bother
with.  Besides, if they'd been monitoring Secret Service phone
calls, obviously they'd never have been caught in the first
place.  Right?

  The Secret Service was less than satisfied with this
rapier-like hacker logic.

  Then there was the issue of crashing the phone system.
No problem, Urvile admitted sunnily.  Atlanta LoD could have shut
down phone service all over Atlanta any time they liked.  EVEN
THE 911 SERVICE?  Nothing special about that, Urvile explained
patiently.  Bring the switch to its knees, with say the UNIX
"makedir" bug, and 911 goes down too as a matter of course.  The
911 system wasn't very interesting, frankly.  It might be
tremendously interesting to cops (for odd reasons of their own),
but as technical challenges went, the 911 service was
yawnsville.

  So of course the Atlanta Three could crash service.  They
probably could have crashed service all over BellSouth territory,
if they'd worked at it for a while.  But Atlanta LoD weren't
crashers.  Only losers and rodents were crashers.  LoD were
ELITE.

    Urvile was privately convinced that sheer technical
expertise could win him free of any kind of problem.  As far as
he was concerned, elite status in the digital underground had
placed him permanently beyond the intellectual grasp of cops and
straights.  Urvile had a lot to learn.

  Of the three LoD stalwarts, Prophet was in the most
direct trouble.  Prophet was a UNIX programming expert who
burrowed in and out of the Internet as a matter of course.  He'd
started his hacking career at around age 14, meddling with a UNIX
mainframe system at the University of North Carolina.

  Prophet himself had written the handy Legion of Doom file
"UNIX Use and Security From the Ground Up."  UNIX (pronounced
"you-nicks") is a powerful, flexible computer operating-system,
for multi-user, multi-tasking computers.  In 1969, when UNIX was
created in Bell Labs, such computers were exclusive to large
corporations and universities, but today UNIX is run on thousands
of powerful home machines.  UNIX was particularly well-suited to
telecommunications programming, and had become a standard in the
field.  Naturally, UNIX also became a standard for the elite
hacker and phone phreak.

  Lately, Prophet had not been so active as Leftist and
Urvile, but Prophet was a recidivist.  In 1986, when he was
eighteen, Prophet had been convicted of "unauthorized access to a
computer network" in North Carolina.  He'd been discovered
breaking into the Southern Bell Data Network, a UNIX-based
internal telco network supposedly closed to the public.  He'd
gotten a typical hacker sentence:  six months suspended, 120
hours community service, and three years' probation.

  After that humiliating bust, Prophet had gotten rid of
most of his tonnage of illicit phreak and hacker data, and had
tried to go straight.  He was, after all, still on probation.
But by  the autumn of 1988, the temptations of cyberspace had
proved too much for young Prophet, and he was shoulder-to-
shoulder with Urvile and Leftist into some of the hairiest
systems around.

  In early September 1988, he'd broken into BellSouth's
centralized automation system, AIMSX or "Advanced Information
Management System."  AIMSX was an internal business network for
BellSouth, where telco employees stored electronic mail,
databases, memos, and calendars, and did text processing.  Since
AIMSX did not have public dial-ups, it was considered utterly
invisible to the public, and was not well-secured--it didn't even
require passwords.  Prophet abused an account known as "waa1,"
the personal account of an unsuspecting telco employee.
Disguised as the owner of waa1, Prophet made about ten visits to
AIMSX.

  Prophet did not damage or delete anything in the system.
His presence in AIMSX was harmless and almost invisible.  But he
could not rest content with that.

  One particular piece of processed text on AIMSX was a
telco document known as "Bell South Standard Practice 660-225-
104SV Control Office Administration of Enhanced 911 Services for
Special Services and Major Account Centers dated March 1988."

  Prophet had not been looking for this document.  It was
merely one among hundreds of similar documents with impenetrable
titles.  However, having blundered over it in the course of his
illicit wanderings through AIMSX, he decided to take it with him
as a trophy.  It might prove very useful in some future boasting,
bragging, and strutting session.  So, some time in September
1988, Prophet ordered the AIMSX mainframe computer to copy this
document (henceforth called simply called "the E911 Document")
and to transfer this copy to his home computer.

  No one noticed that Prophet had done this.  He had
"stolen" the E911 Document in some sense, but notions of property
in cyberspace can be tricky.  BellSouth noticed nothing wrong,
because BellSouth still had their original copy.  They had not
been "robbed" of the document itself.  Many people were supposed
to copy this document--specifically, people who worked for the
nineteen BellSouth "special services and major account centers,"
scattered throughout the Southeastern United States.  That was
what it was for, why it was present on a computer network in the
first place: so that it could be copied and read--by telco
employees.  But now the data had been copied by someone who
wasn't supposed to look at it.

  Prophet now had his trophy.  But he further decided to
store yet another copy of the E911 Document on another person's
computer.  This unwitting person was a computer enthusiast named
Richard Andrews who lived near Joliet, Illinois.  Richard Andrews
was a UNIX programmer by trade, and ran a powerful UNIX board
called "Jolnet," in the basement of his house.

  Prophet, using the handle "Robert Johnson," had obtained
an account on Richard Andrews' computer.  And there he stashed
the E911 Document, by storing it in his own private section of
Andrews' computer.

  Why did Prophet do this?  If Prophet had eliminated the
E911 Document from his own computer, and kept it hundreds of
miles away, on another machine, under an alias, then he might
have been fairly safe from discovery and prosecution--although
his sneaky action had certainly put the unsuspecting Richard
Andrews at risk.

  But, like most hackers, Prophet was a pack-rat for
illicit data.  When it came to the crunch, he could not bear to
part from his trophy.  When Prophet's place in Decatur, Georgia
was raided in July 1989, there was the E911 Document, a smoking
gun.  And there was Prophet in the hands of the Secret Service,
doing his best to "explain."

  Our story now takes us away from the Atlanta Three and
their raids of the Summer of 1989.  We must leave Atlanta Three
"cooperating fully" with their numerous investigators.  And all
three of them did cooperate, as their Sentencing Memorandum from
the US District Court of the Northern Division of Georgia
explained--just before all three of them were sentenced to
various federal prisons in November 1990.

  We must now catch up on the other aspects of the war on
the Legion of Doom.  The war on the Legion was a war on a
network--in fact, a network of three networks, which intertwined
and interrelated in a complex fashion.  The Legion itself, with
Atlanta LoD, and their hanger-on Fry Guy, were the first network.
The second network was PHRACK magazine, with its editors and
contributors.

  The third network involved the electronic circle around a
hacker known as "Terminus."

  The war against these hacker networks was carried out by
a law enforcement network.  Atlanta LoD and Fry Guy were pursued
by USSS agents and federal prosecutors in Atlanta, Indiana, and
Chicago.  "Terminus" found himself pursued by USSS and federal
prosecutors from Baltimore and Chicago.  And the war against
Phrack was almost entirely a Chicago operation.

  The investigation of Terminus involved a great deal of
energy, mostly from the Chicago Task Force, but it was to be the
least-known and least-publicized of the Crackdown operations.
Terminus, who lived in Maryland, was a UNIX programmer and
consultant, fairly well-known (under his given name) in the UNIX
community, as an acknowledged expert on AT&T minicomputers.
Terminus idolized AT&T, especially Bellcore, and longed for
public recognition as a UNIX expert; his highest ambition was to
work for Bell Labs.

  But Terminus had odd friends and a spotted history.
Terminus had once been the subject of an admiring interview in
PHRACK (Volume II, Issue 14, Phile 2--dated May 1987).  In this
article, PHRACK co-editor Taran King described "Terminus" as an
electronics engineer, 5'9", brown-haired, born in 1959--at 28
years old, quite mature for a hacker.

  Terminus had once been sysop of a phreak/hack underground
board called "MetroNet," which ran on an Apple II.  Later he'd
replaced "MetroNet" with an underground board called "MegaNet,"
specializing in IBMs.  In his younger days, Terminus had written
one of the very first and most elegant code-scanning programs for
the IBM-PC.  This program had been widely distributed in the
underground.  Uncounted legions of PC-owning phreaks and hackers
had used Terminus's scanner program to rip-off telco codes.
This feat had not escaped the attention of telco security; it
hardly could, since Terminus's earlier handle, "Terminal
Technician," was proudly written right on the program.

  When he became a full-time computer professional
(specializing in telecommunications programming), he adopted the
handle Terminus, meant to indicate that he had "reached the final
point of being a proficient hacker."  He'd moved up to the UNIX-
based "Netsys" board on an AT&T computer, with four phone lines
and an impressive 240 megs of storage.  "Netsys" carried complete
issues of PHRACK, and Terminus was quite friendly with its
publishers, Taran King and Knight Lightning.

  In the early 1980s, Terminus had been a regular on
Plovernet, Pirate-80, Sherwood Forest and Shadowland, all well-
known pirate boards, all heavily frequented by the Legion of
Doom.  As it happened, Terminus was never officially "in LoD,"
because he'd never been given the official LoD high-sign and
back-slap by Legion maven Lex Luthor.  Terminus had never
physically met anyone from LoD.  But that scarcely mattered
much--the Atlanta Three themselves had never been officially
vetted by Lex, either.

  As far as law enforcement was concerned, the issues were
clear. Terminus was a full-time, adult computer professional with
particular skills at AT&T software and hardware--but Terminus
reeked of the Legion of Doom and the underground.

  On February 1, 1990--half a month after the Martin Luther
King Day Crash--USSS agents Tim Foley from Chicago, and Jack
Lewis from the Baltimore office, accompanied by AT&T security
officer Jerry Dalton, travelled to Middle Town, Maryland.  There
they grilled Terminus in his home (to the stark terror of his
wife and small children), and, in their customary fashion, hauled
his computers out the door.

  The Netsys machine proved to contain a plethora of arcane
UNIX software--proprietary source code formally owned by AT&T.
Software such as:  UNIX System Five Release 3.2; UNIX SV Release
3.1; UUCP communications software; KORN SHELL; RFS; IWB; WWB;
DWB; the C++ programming language; PMON; TOOL CHEST; QUEST; DACT,
and S FIND.

  In the long-established piratical tradition of the
underground, Terminus had been trading this illicitly-copied
software with a small circle of fellow UNIX programmers.  Very
unwisely, he had stored seven years of his electronic mail on his
Netsys machine, which documented all the friendly arrangements he
had made with his various colleagues.

  Terminus had not crashed the AT&T phone system on January
15.  He was, however, blithely running a not-for-profit AT&T
software-piracy ring.  This was not an activity AT&T found
amusing.  AT&T security officer Jerry Dalton valued this "stolen"
property at over three hundred thousand dollars.

  AT&T's entry into the tussle of free enterprise had been
complicated by the new, vague groundrules of the information
economy.  Until the break-up of Ma Bell, AT&T was forbidden to
sell computer hardware or software.  Ma Bell was the phone
company; Ma Bell was not allowed to use the enormous revenue from
telephone utilities, in order to finance any entry into the
computer market.

  AT&T nevertheless invented the UNIX operating system.
And somehow AT&T managed to make UNIX a minor source of income.
Weirdly, UNIX was not sold as computer software, but actually
retailed under an obscure regulatory exemption allowing sales of
surplus equipment and scrap.  Any bolder attempt to promote or
retail UNIX would have aroused angry legal opposition from
computer companies.  Instead, UNIX was licensed to universities,
at modest rates, where the acids of academic freedom ate away
steadily at AT&T's proprietary rights.

  Come the breakup, AT&T recognized that UNIX was a
potential gold-mine.  By now, large chunks of UNIX code had been
created that were not AT&T's, and were being sold by others.  An
entire rival UNIX-based operating system had arisen in Berkeley,
California (one of the world's great founts of ideological
hackerdom).  Today, "hackers" commonly consider "Berkeley UNIX"
to be technically superior to AT&T's "System V UNIX," but AT&T
has not allowed mere technical elegance to intrude on the real-
world business of marketing proprietary software.  AT&T has made
its own code deliberately incompatible with other folks' UNIX,
and has written code that it can prove is copyrightable, even if
that code happens to be somewhat awkward--"kludgey."  AT&T UNIX
user licenses are serious business agreements, replete with very
clear copyright statements and non-disclosure clauses.

  AT&T has not exactly kept the UNIX cat in the bag, but it
kept a grip on its scruff with some success.  By the rampant,
explosive standards of software piracy, AT&T UNIX source code is
heavily copyrighted, well-guarded, well-licensed.  UNIX was
traditionally run only on mainframe machines, owned by large
groups of suit-and-tie professionals, rather than on bedroom
machines where people can get up to easy mischief.

  And AT&T UNIX source code is serious high-level
programming.  The number of skilled UNIX programmers with any
actual motive to swipe UNIX source code is small.  It's tiny,
compared to the tens of thousands prepared to rip-off, say,
entertaining PC games like "Leisure Suit Larry."

  But by 1989, the warez-d00d underground, in the persons
of Terminus and his friends, was gnawing at AT&T UNIX.  And the
property in question was not sold for twenty bucks over the
counter at the local branch of Babbage's or Egghead's; this was
massive, sophisticated, multi-line, multi-author corporate code
worth tens of thousands of dollars.

  It must be recognized at this point that Terminus's
purported ring of UNIX software pirates had not actually made any
money from their suspected crimes.  The $300,000 dollar figure
bandied about for the contents of Terminus's computer did not
mean that Terminus was in actual illicit possession of three
hundred thousand of AT&T's dollars.  Terminus was shipping
software back and forth, privately, person to person, for free.
He was not making a commercial business of piracy.  He hadn't
asked for money; he didn't take money.  He lived quite modestly.

  AT&T employees--as well as freelance UNIX consultants,
like Terminus--commonly worked with "proprietary" AT&T software,
both in the office and at home on their private machines.  AT&T
rarely sent security officers out to comb the hard disks of its
consultants.  Cheap freelance UNIX contractors were quite useful
to AT&T; they didn't have health insurance or retirement
programs, much less union membership in the Communication Workers
of America.  They were humble digital drudges, wandering with mop
and bucket through the Great Technological Temple of AT&T; but
when the Secret Service arrived at their homes, it seemed they
were eating with company silverware and sleeping on company
sheets!  Outrageously, they behaved as if the things they worked
with every day belonged to them!

  And these were no mere hacker teenagers with their hands
full of trash-paper and their noses pressed to the corporate
windowpane.  These guys were UNIX wizards, not only carrying AT&T
data in their machines and their heads, but eagerly networking
about it, over machines that were far more powerful than anything
previously imagined in private hands.  How do you keep people
disposable, yet assure their awestruck respect for your property?
It was a dilemma.

  Much UNIX code was public-domain, available for free.
Much "proprietary" UNIX code had been extensively re-written,
perhaps altered so much that it became an entirely new product--
or perhaps not.  Intellectual property rights for software
developers were, and are, extraordinarily complex and confused.
And software "piracy," like the private copying of videos, is one
of the most widely practiced "crimes" in the world today.

  The USSS were not experts in UNIX or familiar with the
customs of its use.  The United States Secret Service, considered
as a body, did not have one single person in it who could program
in a UNIX environment--no, not even one.  The Secret Service WERE
making extensive use of expert help, but the "experts" they had
chosen were AT&T and Bellcore security officials, the very
victims of the purported crimes under investigation, the very
people whose interest in AT&T's "proprietary" software was most
pronounced.

  On February 6, 1990, Terminus was arrested by Agent
Lewis.  Eventually, Terminus would be sent to prison for his
illicit use of a piece of AT&T software.

  The issue of pirated AT&T software would bubble along in
the background during the war on the Legion of Doom.  Some half-
dozen of Terminus's on-line acquaintances, including people in
Illinois, Texas and California, were grilled by the Secret
Service in connection with the illicit copying of software.
Except for Terminus, however, none were charged with a crime.
None of them shared his peculiar prominence in the hacker
underground.

  But that did not mean that these people would, or could,
stay out of trouble.  The transferral of illicit data in
cyberspace is hazy and ill-defined business, with paradoxical
dangers for everyone concerned:  hackers, signal carriers, board
owners, cops, prosecutors, even random passers-by.  Sometimes,
well-meant attempts to avert trouble or punish wrongdoing bring
more trouble than would simple ignorance, indifference or
impropriety.

  Terminus's "Netsys" board was not a common-or-garden
bulletin board system, though it had most of the usual functions
of a board.  Netsys was not a stand-alone machine, but part of
the globe-spanning "UUCP" cooperative network.  The UUCP network
uses a set of Unix software programs called "Unix-to-Unix Copy,"
which allows Unix systems to throw data to one another at high
speed through the public telephone network.  UUCP is a radically
decentralized, not-for-profit network of UNIX computers.  There
are tens of thousands of these UNIX machines.  Some are small,
but many are powerful and also link to other networks.  UUCP has
certain arcane links to major networks such as JANET, EasyNet,
BITNET, JUNET, VNET, DASnet, PeaceNet and FidoNet, as well as the
gigantic Internet.  (The so-called "Internet" is not actually a
network itself, but rather an "internetwork" connections standard
that allows several globe-spanning computer networks to
communicate with one another.  Readers fascinated by the weird
and intricate tangles of modern computer networks may enjoy John
S. Quarterman's authoritative 719-page explication, THE MATRIX,
Digital Press, 1990.)

  A skilled user of Terminus' UNIX machine could send and
receive electronic mail from almost any major computer network in
the world.  Netsys was not called a "board" per se, but rather a
"node."  "Nodes" were larger, faster, and more sophisticated than
mere "boards," and for hackers, to hang out on internationally-
connected "nodes" was quite the step up from merely hanging out
on local "boards."

  Terminus's Netsys node in Maryland had a number of direct
links to other, similar UUCP nodes, run by people who shared his
interests and at least something of his free-wheeling attitude.
One of these nodes was Jolnet, owned by Richard Andrews, who,
like Terminus, was an independent UNIX consultant.  Jolnet also
ran UNIX, and could be contacted at high speed by mainframe
machines from all over the world.  Jolnet was quite a
sophisticated piece of work, technically speaking, but it was
still run by an individual, as a private, not-for-profit hobby.
Jolnet was mostly used by other UNIX programmers--for mail,
storage, and access to networks.  Jolnet supplied access network
access to about two hundred people, as well as a local junior
college.

  Among its various features and services, Jolnet also
carried PHRACK magazine.

  For reasons of his own, Richard Andrews had become
suspicious of a new user called "Robert Johnson."  Richard
Andrews took it upon himself to have a look at what "Robert
Johnson" was storing in Jolnet.  And Andrews found the E911
Document.

  "Robert Johnson" was the Prophet from the Legion of Doom,
and the E911 Document was illicitly copied data from Prophet's
raid on the BellSouth computers.

  The E911 Document, a particularly illicit piece of
digital property, was about to resume its long, complex, and
disastrous career.

  It struck Andrews as fishy that someone not a telephone
employee should have a document referring to the "Enhanced 911
System."  Besides, the document itself bore an obvious warning.



  "WARNING:  NOT FOR USE OR DISCLOSURE OUTSIDE BELLSOUTH OR
ANY OF ITS SUBSIDIARIES EXCEPT UNDER WRITTEN AGREEMENT."



  These standard nondisclosure tags are often appended to
all sorts of corporate material.  Telcos as a species are
particularly notorious for stamping most everything in sight as
"not for use or disclosure."  Still, this particular piece of
data was about the 911 System.  That sounded bad to Rich Andrews.

  Andrews was not prepared to ignore this sort of trouble.
He thought it would be wise to pass the document along to a
friend and acquaintance on the UNIX network, for consultation.
So, around September 1988, Andrews sent yet another copy of the
E911 Document electronically to an AT&T employee, one Charles
Boykin, who ran a UNIX-based node called "attctc" in Dallas,
Texas.

  "Attctc" was the property of AT&T, and was run from
AT&T's Customer Technology Center in Dallas, hence the name
"attctc."  "Attctc" was better-known as "Killer," the name of the
machine that the system was running on.  "Killer" was a hefty,
powerful, AT&T 3B2 500 model, a multi-user, multi-tasking UNIX
platform with 32 meg of memory and a mind-boggling 3.2 Gigabytes
of storage.  When Killer had first arrived in Texas, in 1985, the
3B2 had been one of AT&T's great white hopes for going head-to-
head with IBM for the corporate computer-hardware market.
"Killer" had been shipped to the Customer Technology Center in
the Dallas Infomart, essentially a high-technology mall, and
there it sat, a demonstration model.

  Charles Boykin, a veteran AT&T hardware and digital
communications expert, was a local technical backup man for the
AT&T 3B2 system.  As a display model in the Infomart mall,
"Killer" had little to do, and it seemed a shame to waste the
system's capacity.  So Boykin ingeniously wrote some UNIX
bulletin-board software for "Killer," and plugged the machine in
to the local phone network.  "Killer's" debut in late 1985 made
it the first publicly available UNIX site in the state of Texas.
Anyone who wanted to play was welcome.

  The machine immediately attracted an electronic
community.  It joined the UUCP network, and offered network links
to over eighty other computer sites, all of which became
dependent on Killer for their links to the greater world of
cyberspace.  And it wasn't just for the big guys; personal
computer users also stored freeware programs for the Amiga, the
Apple, the IBM and the Macintosh on Killer's vast 3,200 meg
archives.  At one time, Killer had the largest library of public-
domain Macintosh software in Texas.

  Eventually, Killer attracted about 1,500 users, all
busily communicating, uploading and downloading, getting mail,
gossipping, and linking to arcane and distant networks.

   Boykin received no pay for running Killer.  He
considered it good publicity for the AT&T 3B2 system (whose sales
were somewhat less than stellar), but he also simply enjoyed the
vibrant community his skill had created.  He gave away the
bulletin-board UNIX software he had written, free of charge.

  In the UNIX programming community, Charlie Boykin had the
reputation of a warm, open-hearted, level-headed kind of guy.  In
1989, a group of Texan UNIX professionals voted Boykin "System
Administrator of the Year."  He was considered a fellow you could
trust for good advice.

  In September 1988, without warning, the E911 Document
came plunging into Boykin's life, forwarded by Richard Andrews.
Boykin immediately recognized that the Document was hot property.
He was not a voice-communications man, and knew little about the
ins and outs of the Baby Bells, but he certainly knew what the
911 System was, and he was angry to see confidential data about
it in the hands of a nogoodnik.  This was clearly a matter for
telco security.  So, on September 21, 1988, Boykin made yet
ANOTHER copy of the E911 Document and passed this one along to a
professional acquaintance of his, one Jerome Dalton, from AT&T
Corporate Information Security.  Jerry Dalton was the very fellow
who would later raid Terminus's house.

  From AT&T's security division, the E911 Document went to
Bellcore.

  Bellcore (or BELL COmmunications REsearch) had once been
the central laboratory of the Bell System.  Bell Labs employees
had invented the UNIX operating system.  Now Bellcore was a
quasi-independent, jointly owned company that acted as the
research arm for all seven of the Baby Bell RBOCs.  Bellcore was
in a good position to co-ordinate security technology and
consultation for the RBOCs, and the gentleman in charge of this
effort was Henry M. Kluepfel, a veteran of the Bell System who
had worked there for twenty-four years.

  On October 13, 1988, Dalton passed the E911 Document to
Henry Kluepfel.  Kluepfel, a veteran expert witness in
telecommunications fraud and computer-fraud cases, had certainly
seen worse trouble than this.  He recognized the document for
what it was:  a trophy from a hacker break-in.

  However, whatever harm had been done in the intrusion was
presumably old news.  At this point there seemed little to be
done.  Kluepfel made a careful note of the circumstances and
shelved the problem for the time being.

  Whole months passed.

  February 1989 arrived.  The Atlanta Three were living it
up in Bell South's switches, and had not yet met their
comeuppance.  The Legion was thriving.  So was PHRACK magazine.
A good six months had passed since Prophet's AIMSX break-in.
Prophet, as hackers will, grew weary of sitting on his laurels.
"Knight Lightning" and "Taran King," the editors of PHRACK, were
always begging Prophet for material they could publish.  Prophet
decided that the heat must be off by this time, and that he could
safely brag, boast, and strut.

  So he sent a copy of the E911 Document--yet another one--
from Rich Andrews' Jolnet machine to Knight Lightning's BITnet
account at the University of Missouri.

  Let's review the fate of the document so far.

  0.  The original E911 Document.  This in the AIMSX system
on a mainframe computer in Atlanta, available to hundreds of
people, but all of them, presumably, BellSouth employees.  An
unknown number of them may have their own copies of this
document, but they are all professionals and all trusted by the
phone company.

  1.  Prophet's illicit copy, at home on his own computer
in Decatur, Georgia.

  2.  Prophet's back-up copy, stored on Rich Andrew's
Jolnet machine in the basement of Rich Andrews' house near
Joliet Illinois.

  3.  Charles Boykin's copy on "Killer" in Dallas, Texas,
sent by Rich Andrews from Joliet.

  4.  Jerry Dalton's copy at AT&T Corporate Information
Security in New Jersey, sent from Charles Boykin in Dallas.

  5.  Henry Kluepfel's copy at Bellcore security
headquarters in New Jersey, sent by Dalton.

  6.  Knight Lightning's copy, sent by Prophet from Rich
Andrews' machine, and now in Columbia, Missouri.

  We can see that the "security" situation of this
proprietary document, once dug out of AIMSX, swiftly became
bizarre.  Without any money changing hands, without any
particular special effort, this data had been reproduced at least
six times and had spread itself all over the continent.  By far
the worst, however, was yet to come.

  In February 1989, Prophet and Knight Lightning bargained
electronically over the fate of this trophy.  Prophet wanted to
boast, but, at the same time, scarcely wanted to be caught.

  For his part, Knight Lightning was eager to publish as
much of the document as he could manage.  Knight Lightning was a
fledgling political-science major with a particular interest in
freedom-of-information issues.  He would gladly publish most
anything that would reflect glory on the prowess of the
underground and embarrass the telcos.  However, Knight Lightning
himself had contacts in telco security, and sometimes consulted
them on material he'd received that might be too dicey for
publication.

  Prophet and Knight Lightning decided to edit the E911
Document so as to delete most of its identifying traits.  First
of all, its large "NOT FOR USE OR DISCLOSURE" warning had to go.
Then there were other matters.  For instance, it listed the
office telephone numbers of several BellSouth 911 specialists in
Florida.  If these phone numbers were published in PHRACK, the
BellSouth employees involved would very likely be hassled by
phone phreaks, which would anger BellSouth no end, and pose a
definite operational hazard for both Prophet and PHRACK.

  So Knight Lightning cut the Document almost in half,
removing the phone numbers and some of the touchier and more
specific information.  He passed it back electronically to
Prophet; Prophet was still nervous, so Knight Lightning cut a bit
more.  They finally agreed that it was ready to go, and that it
would be published in PHRACK under the pseudonym, "The
Eavesdropper."

  And this was done on February 25, 1989.

  The twenty-fourth issue of PHRACK featured a chatty
interview with co-ed phone-phreak "Chanda Leir," three articles
on BITNET and its links to other computer networks, an article on
800 and 900 numbers by "Unknown User," "VaxCat's" article on
telco basics (slyly entitled "Lifting Ma Bell's Veil of
Secrecy,)" and the usual "Phrack World News."

  The News section, with painful irony, featured an
extended account of the sentencing of "Shadowhawk," an eighteen-
year-old Chicago hacker who had just been put in federal prison
by William J. Cook himself.

  And then there were the two articles by "The
Eavesdropper."  The first was the edited E911 Document, now
titled "Control Office Administration Of Enhanced 911 Services
for Special Services and Major Account Centers."  Eavesdropper's
second article was a glossary of te